you can't have permanent war without fiat.
And I also think there's a case to be made
that you can't really have fiat without war.
The following is a conversation with Safety and Amuse,
one of the central and most impactful economists,
philosophers, and educators in the world of Bitcoin.
He's an Austrian economist, an anarchist,
and the author of the Bitcoin Standard
and the new book, The Fiat Standard.
Safety does not mince words in his criticism
of economists and humans in general
with whom he disagrees.
For example, Paul Krugman,
who is a Neil McKenziean economist
and a previous guest at this podcast.
Safety and opinions are strong and often controversial.
I do push back in this conversation,
playing devil's advocate or trying to steal man on each side.
But as always, I do so in the service of exploring
the rich space of ideas that safety has
about human nature and human civilization.
I trust the intelligence of you, the listener,
to come to your own conclusions.
That is the burden of being a free thinking human.
It is on each of us individually
to dive into this chaos of ideas.
And from that chaos,
discover long lasting universal wisdom to live by.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's safety and moose.
Let's start with a big question.
What is money?
And what is the role of money
in the history of human civilization?
Money is a medium of exchange.
The thing that defines money is that it is a good
that you don't buy for its own sake
because you want to consume it itself
or because you want to employ it
in the production of other goods,
which is what capital goods are.
So we have consumption goods, we have capital goods.
Money is distinct from those two
because it is a good that is acquired purely
to be exchanged later on for other goods.
So it's not something that you acquire for its own sake.
You acquire it so that you can then later on exchange it.
And that's a market good.
That's a market good like all other goods.
You acquire food because you eat it.
You acquire a car to move you around.
You acquire money so that you can exchange it
for other goods.
And that's something that many people have
a hard time grasping of the concept of money
as a market good.
But it is a market good just like all others.
And the importance of it is that it allows us to trade.
It allows us to develop the division of labor
which would not be possible
at any kind of sophisticated level without money.
So if we live in a small society of 10 people,
then think about all the things that we can make,
all the things that we can produce.
If we're only 10 people isolated from the world,
there's only very few things that we can make.
And therefore we can exchange those things
directly with one another.
But as if we get in contact with other societies
that have more people,
then the opportunities for specialization increase.
There's 10 people,
the only thing that you can make is the very basics
you need for your survival.
But if you're part of an economy of 10 million people,
there's much more room for specialization.
You can make a car, you can make a house
that's very sophisticated.
And that relies on the division of labor.
That relies on you specializing in doing
one tiny little thing which is not what you consume.
You know, and you trade that thing
for all the things that you consume.
So as the economy becomes more sophisticated
and involves more people,
and currently we're all part of an economy
of almost eight billion people,
each one of us produces one tiny little thing
and they exchange that thing
for all the things that they want.
And so because we specialize,
we become more productive in doing the thing
that we're good at.
So, you know, there's people out there
who are engineers who are designing windshields in cars.
It's a very specialized thing.
They sell windshield design to Mercedes Benz.
And then from that, you know,
that windshield design is added on
to millions of cars around the world.
And from that, they're able to get enough money
to meet all of their needs.
So the division of labor is enhanced enormously with money
because without money, it's very difficult
to be able to exchange a large number of goods.
It's very difficult to have a sophisticated economy
with a large degree of specialization
because it's very difficult to find people
who want the thing that you have
and have the thing that you want.
We call this the coincidence of wants.
And that's really the problem that money solves.
So you make apples and I make oranges.
I'd like to have some of your apples,
but you don't want my oranges.
And that's, we have a problem of coincidence of wants.
So what do I do?
You want bananas.
I need to find somebody who has bananas,
give them my oranges, take their bananas,
give you their bananas, and then I take the apples.
In that case, bananas are a medium of exchange.
So it's natural that a medium of exchange will evolve
and will emerge in an economy
as an economy becomes more sophisticated.
As we move beyond 10 people and 10 goods,
it's inevitable that we're going to come to a situation
where we have the problem of coincidence of wants
and the way to solve that is to use a medium of exchange.
And it can be anything.
It can be a banana.
It can be food stuff.
It can be any kind of good.
As long as I acquire the good with the purpose
of passing it on to you,
not with the purpose of me consuming it or using it,
then that's a medium of exchange.
So when we look at the entirety of human society
of millions of billions of people,
you think of them just a bunch of individuals
running around.
I love the term coincidence of wants.
So each one of them, it's like a stochastic system.
They have desires.
It's like a random collection of desires.
Some somehow rooted in our evolutionary history,
but mostly random in terms of preference of banana
or apple, that kind of thing.
And then they also have the capacity for competence
and excellence in particular kind of labor.
So like a specialization.
They're able to be like incredible
at a particular set of tasks.
So there's a bunch of ants running around
with consciousness and intelligence.
And they have desires and have capabilities.
And then there's a coincidence of both the wants they have
and the capabilities they have.
And you want it to create a system
that kind of exchanges those things.
So when you imagine like what is a good?
What is markets?
When you imagine a market is like a hierarchical system,
what do you imagine?
What is a market?
A market is just the name for the naturally emergent
phenomena of people voluntarily exchanging things.
It's at any scale.
At any scale, yeah.
Individuals could be a market of two people
on an island on their own.
It could be eight billion people across the planet.
Naturally emerging.
Yes, this is the thing I think that is very hard
for many people who don't have a good understanding
of economics to grasp that capitalism and markets
are not something that you need a central planner
or a government officer to make happen.
Capitalism is just what happens when people are left
to their own devices.
It's just our cognitive capacity allows us
to develop tools that we can use for production.
And that's what we do.
That's what humans have been doing since they started
making spears to hunt.
That's the first capital good, probably.
So we're constantly accumulating capital.
We're constantly trading with one another.
We find an opportunity.
You've got a lot of oranges.
I've got a lot of apples.
Then I'll take some of yours.
You'll take some of mine.
We're both better off.
This is just a naturally emergent thing.
And money is what makes it enormously powerful.
Money is what allows it to scale, really.
Money is what allows it to go beyond small societies
into just something that is global.
Because with money, again, as I was saying earlier,
all you need to do is specialize in doing one thing,
the thing that you do best.
And then you exchange that for money
and you don't have to worry about whether the other people
involved in this want what you have and have what you want.
You just sell it for money to whoever wants it
and you buy whatever you want from whoever has it.
And that's an enormous reduction in the mental burden
of how a market economy functions.
So the first thing that I would say about money
is that it allows for the division of labor
and it allows for the market system to grow.
And the second thing is that money
is a mechanism for storing value into the future.
So again, as humans, we develop the capacity
to think for the future.
We make a spear so that we can hunt and then we
see that it works and then we take it out of the animal
that we hunted it with and we keep it for the next day's hunt.
And then we start making a better spear
and we make a better fishing rod and then we make a fishing net
and then we make a fishing boat.
And that's our ability to think of the future.
And as we start building durable goods,
we start thinking more and more of the future.
We start becoming more and more future oriented.
And that's really the process of civilization,
the process of denying our needs now
in order to think for the future.
So instead of spending all of our day on the beach
enjoying ourselves, we take time off from leisure
on the beach and spend some time making a spear
or making a fishing rod so that our productivity in hunting
or fishing tomorrow is going to be higher.
And so that ability to think for the future
is enhanced by our ability to provide for the future.
And we do that with durable goods.
But then money ends up being the best mechanism
for providing for the future because the future is uncertain.
So you can save your apples and oranges.
You can save the spears.
You can save the animal that you hunted.
But these things, first they rot.
They're not very good at holding on to their value over time.
But even if they were, even if you have objects
that are durable, the problem with them
is that you don't know if you need them tomorrow
or next month or next year.
You're not sure if you're going to be needing them
and you might end up not needing them
and you might end up not finding anybody who needs them
or finding somebody who needs them
but doesn't value them much
and won't give you much in exchange.
Money allows you the optionality
of saving the most liquid good, the most saleable good.
So it's something that you can sell tomorrow
with the least uncertainty.
It has the most liquidity, the most ability
to be sold without a loss in its value.
So money is our most advanced technology
and our best technology for moving value into the future.
And so I think history really,
and I argue this in all my books,
is that really history, we see,
we can think of it as a process of our money gets harder
and so our money gets better at holding on
to its value for the future.
And by harder, I mean harder to produce.
We find things that are hard to produce
that are better at holding on to their value.
So they hold on to their value better for the future
and that allows us to plot and plan for the future.
That makes the future less uncertain
and that makes us more future oriented.
In other words, it lowers our time preference
and the harder the money is,
the better it is at allowing us to think of the future.
So people should know that you've written
the book Bitcoin Standard from 2018, I believe.
And then a new book called Fiat Standard.
The Bitcoin Standard is considered kind of the Bible
in the cryptocurrency space and the Bitcoin space
of just a very rigorous systematic explanation
of why Bitcoin, what is it, why should it be,
why is it good.
So you're describing in that book and in the new book,
different implementations to the technology of money.
In the new book, you talk about Fiat Money,
which is another way to do money.
So obviously there's a lot of different ways to do money
and maybe you haven't discovered the best way to do money.
Yet our conversation today is how to do money
better.
Maybe we'll go back to bananas eventually, right?
Very good reasons why we won't.
Well, we can disagree.
We can agree to disagree on this.
I'm open minded to the bananas.
One of the biggest source of joy to me
when I first came to this country is eating bananas.
And so maybe money, happiness, perishable happiness
will eventually become the best medium of exchange.
I don't know, open minded.
Anyway, so you mentioned hard money and soft money.
So there's different ways to do money.
What is hard money?
What is soft money?
In the Bitcoin standard, I present the argument
that money is always whatever is the hardest thing to make.
Historically, I think we see many examples of that.
So for instance, in prison, people use cigarettes as money
because nobody can make cigarettes in prison.
In societies, we have the example of Yap Island.
For instance, it's an island that doesn't have any limestone,
but there's a nearby island that has a lot of limestone.
And it's very expensive, obviously,
with primitive technology to move limestone
from Palau to Yap.
So on Yap, limestones wear money.
Seashells, rare seashells that are not easy to find
end up serving as money in places where they're rare.
Glass beads wear money in West Africa
where there was no glass making technology
because they were imported from abroad
and they were very hard to make.
And I think there's a conscious effort
of some people might recognize the hardness and the scarcity
and choose this as money.
But I think what's more important
is just a natural evolutionary process whereby people choose
all kinds of random things as money, bananas, maybe even.
But then the people who end up making these bad choices
don't end up with any wealth left.
Whereas the people who store their wealth
in the things that are hard to make
end up acquiring, end up maintaining their wealth
and maybe even increasing it over time.
And of course, this culminated in the 19th century,
in the end of the 19th century,
by basically the entire planet being on a gold standard.
What is a gold standard?
The gold standard is basically when money is gold
or at least government currencies backed by gold.
But the reason gold became money and not copper,
not nickel, not bananas,
is that gold is the hardest metal in the world
and it is the hardest metal to increase the supply of.
And the reason for that is based in chemistry.
So gold is indestructible.
You can't destroy gold in any meaningful sense.
It's been accumulating stockpiles for thousands of years.
The gold that was worn by Nefertiti back in ancient Egypt
is today probably in somebody's necklace
or in somebody's gold coin.
It's still there.
So for thousands of years, humans have been digging for gold.
They dig it out of the ground, they refine it,
and then they put it in a jewelry or a coin
and then it just stays there.
It gets melted down into new other forms.
The jewelry gets turned into coins
or coins get turned into bars.
But it's just stockpiles that are accumulating.
On the other hand, every year,
we get better at our technology of looking for gold.
There's more people all over the world.
The population increases, the technology improves.
So we keep finding more and more gold
and we keep making the stockpiles bigger.
However, because we're constantly adding to a stockpile
that is not being devalued, sorry,
that is not being consumed,
because there's no way of consuming gold.
You can't eat it, you can't burn it,
you can't, it doesn't rust.
Because of that, we're constantly adding
to a constantly growing stockpile.
So if you look at the numbers,
you see over the last 100 years,
we've got pretty reliable data on gold production worldwide,
we see that pretty much gold stockpiles
increase at around 1.5 to 2% per year, every year.
So yes, we're making more every year,
but we're making more,
so we're adding to the stockpile, the stockpile grows more.
So every year, we're adding only around 1.5 to 2%.
Compare that to the second hardest metal,
historically, was silver.
And that increased historically at around
maybe 5% per year or so.
Now it probably increases something like closer to 30%
because it's now getting used extensively
in industrial uses.
So when you use it in industry,
when you put silver in a laptop or in a camera
or in a machine, effectively,
you are consuming the stockpile
because it's not used as money,
it's taken out of the monetary stockpile.
So over the last 150 years, since 1870 in particular,
and let's discuss this in detail in the Bitcoin standard,
what happened in 1870 was Germany won the Franco Prussian War
and Germany was on a silver standard,
but the value of silver was declining.
So Germany did something very smart,
which is they took their indemnity from France
in silver and gold
and used that big chunk of gold
to switch to going on a gold standard.
And since then, silver's been collapsing in value next to gold.
So back then the price of an ounce of gold
was around 15 ounces of silver.
Today it's closer to 100.
It's just been declining for the last 150 years.
And so because of that, because of the fact
that it's lost its monetary role
as people shifted toward gold,
the value of silver went down
and so it became economical to use it
in more and more industrial applications.
So the stockpile declines
and then as a result that weakens its monetary properties
more and more and more.
So that's why at the end of the 19th century,
I mean, at the beginning of the 19th century,
gold and silver were money.
By the end, it was basically only gold.
And the countries that were still on a silver standard,
China and India in particular,
suffered enormously from it
because their money was devaluing very quickly next to gold.
And so Europeans who would come to China or India
were able to buy things at practically a big discount.
So I hope it's okay if I ask very simple,
very basic questions.
There's few people in this world that are good
as good as you are at answering very basic,
almost ridiculously basic questions.
Because I think exploring questions like what is money,
is a really great way to think from first principles
to really think deeply about this world.
So I really appreciate you doing that.
When you say standard, what does it mean?
When you say silver standard, gold standard,
again with a basic question.
The term really I think was based out of gold,
the first time this came out was the gold standard.
Because so I said gold was money
at the end of the 19th century,
but it wasn't just that everybody was using gold coins
and trading with gold coins
because that's got a problem of divisibility.
So a lot of things are worth less than one gold coin.
So how do you buy that thing?
And the answer was that you created monetary instruments
that were backed by gold.
And so currencies, national currencies
under the gold standard,
were specific units of gold.
And that's how a gold standard function.
Money was gold, but you had pieces of paper
that were redeemable in gold.
So you could go to the central bank,
you could give them the piece of paper,
the $100 bill or the $10 bill,
and they'll give you gold in exchange.
And they give you a specific quantity of gold in exchange.
Effectively, the paper was just a receipt for gold.
So the paper exactly represented the amount of gold.
Exactly, that was the plan.
Well, that was what it's supposed to do,
but arguably we never had a pure gold standard
because the nature of gold means
that the people who are in charge of the gold,
they have an enormous amount of power
because the gold is concentrated with them.
And as long as not everybody shows up at the same time,
asking for their gold,
then you can make more receipts than you have gold.
And this is good.
So there's always shady stuff going on,
but at least that's the state of goal
is the receipts should exactly represent
the amount of gold there.
And also when you say standard,
it means that governments sort of publicly stated
that this is the approved, the main way
of making transactions that are monetary.
So this is the money.
This is the official money that you should be using
if you live in this country.
Yes, although I would say it's more like the other way around.
It's not that the government's established gold as money.
It's more like gold gave the governments
the credibility for their currencies.
So governments were not the ones that made gold money.
Gold has been money before the states were invented.
States, if you have a government
and you'd like to have some legitimacy
and you'd like to be able to deal
with other governments on an equal footing,
you had to go by the gold standard.
You had to have a currency that was redeemable in gold
so that you could trade with the rest of the world
so that people could in your country use that currency.
So it's not that governments were choosing gold.
It's more like they were having to adapt
their own currencies to gold
in order to give their currencies credibility.
So there's a dance there though,
because if they had to,
then why did they switch away from it after?
So there is a dance where the governments,
the people pressure.
So first of all, the basic characteristics
of the hard money pressures the governments
and the people in terms of what should be used.
Then the people based on their community,
the network effects, the way they,
the narratives they tell each other,
all that kind of stuff,
they pressure the governments
to take on a particular money.
Then the governments, they like power,
they like control, all those kinds of things.
They pressure the people
to tell different kinds of narratives.
So there's a dance going on in this evolution
of what technology to use for a monetary system.
So the reason I don't know if governments had to,
because they clearly didn't have to
because they eventually moved away from it.
So, but there was pressure probably.
Yeah, but I mean, even after they moved away from it,
central banks until today,
they still hold a lot of gold reserves.
In fact, if you look at 1914,
when the world really went off the gold standard,
the amount of gold reserves held by central banks
was a tiny fraction of what it was.
As time went on, central banks accumulated more and more gold.
What ended up happening is they prevented their citizens
from using the gold, but they continued to use it.
So gold continued to be money up until 1971
because effectively the world was on a dollar standard
and the dollars were backed by gold.
But then after 1971, even then,
central banks continued to accumulate gold
because why would you as a central bank
want to accumulate pieces of paper effectively
or credit liabilities of another central bank
that can produce them infinitely?
And it's a lesson that's becoming more and more obvious
to governments today, you know, as we see US sanctions
taking say Russian reserves or Afghanistan reserves.
And this is why, you know,
we see China and Russia have accumulated a lot of gold
over the last 10, 20 years.
So just to return to the question of definitions.
So what is hard money versus soft money?
Yes, so hard, I mean, it's a relative thing,
but the hardness refers to the difficulty
of producing more units of the money supply.
So an easy money would be a money
that is relatively easy to make.
So you can increase the supply by 10, 20, 30, 40, 50%,
or something like that.
So pretty much all commodities, all market commodities,
other than gold and silver, they're easy money
and they're not suitable as a monetary medium
because they're being consumed.
So if you look at, and in the Bitcoin standard,
I mentioned this metric called the stock to flow ratio,
which is the ratio of the annual production,
the flow to the stockpile, the existing stockpiles.
If you look at all the other metals,
they're easy money because they're being consumed.
So think about how much stockpiles of copper
there are in the world today.
So copper companies obviously have some stockpiles of copper.
Major copper consumers will have stockpiles of copper,
but the vast majority of copper is essentially
on a conveyor belt of production from the mine
straight to the consumer good that it's being used for.
So the existing stockpiles are roughly
in the range of one year's production.
If you take all of the companies,
I don't have exact statistics,
and it's very difficult to get these,
but it's roughly in the same range.
Like if copper production were to stop completely today,
we'll have about a year's production
stored in various places.
So that makes copper terrible money
because if you started using copper as money,
and this is why a lot of people say,
well, money is a collective illusion.
Money is a social construct.
If we all agree that something is money,
then something is money.
I think this is completely clueless,
and it's usually Marxists who believe this,
so obviously no understanding of economics.
It's completely clueless
because even if everybody in society decided
we wanted to make copper as money,
even if we all decided to collectively take part
in this hallucination or illusion,
it would not make copper money.
It would just make everybody who decides
to take part in this hallucination poor.
That's it.
It would make copper miners rich.
It would make all of the people
who chose copper as money poor,
and copper would not be money.
It can't work because what happens is
because of the fact that the stockpiles are so small,
if you buy, even if you get the 1,000 richest people
in the world, all of the world's billionaires,
they get together and they all dump
all of the money that they have,
all the stocks, all the bonds, all the gold,
all of the Bitcoin, everything that they own.
They dump it and they buy copper with it.
What's gonna happen?
Price of copper is gonna go up a lot,
but what's gonna stop copper miners
from flooding the market with even more copper
than what the billionaires bought?
Nothing.
They're gonna dump all of that extra copper production.
It's the price of copper is gonna go up,
so there will be a lot more copper mining
than all the other metals.
A lot of nickel companies and gold miners
are gonna switch to focusing on copper,
and then we're gonna dump an enormous amount
of copper on the market.
The value of copper is gonna crash,
and the people who chose copper as money
are just gonna end up with large warehouses
of very cheap, rusting metal.
So that's a brilliant description
and that kind of pushes towards gold
where the stock to flow ratio,
I guess you would say is 1.5 to 2%,
like you mentioned earlier.
That would be like the inverse of the stock to flow.
That's the supply growth rate.
So the stock to flow is the inverse, it's around 60.
60, got it.
But let me push back on somebody who likes human psychology.
Let me push back on the collective hallucination
and the illusion.
So that's for copper, but what about paper money?
That's not, you can't smoke it, you can't eat it.
It's supposed to represent,
it's supposed to just be the medium of exchange.
In that sense, what role does collective hallucination play
in the effectiveness of money?
Exactly zero, because all of the paper money,
first of all, there's never been an instance.
And again, this flies in the face
of a lot of people like to think about money.
There's never been an instance
where a government came out and said,
all right, we're printing out these pieces of paper,
use them as money.
This one is worth 10 apples or use it for buying things.
And here's the piece of paper.
This has never happened.
They've always taken fiat money, paper money,
all of these things were always borne out of fraud.
Initially it was a receipt for gold.
And then they told you, well, you don't need the gold anyway
and you have to use this.
And then if you don't use it, we throw you in jail.
And then, so first of all, it doesn't,
you can't enforce this thing.
So it's never really just happened.
And it's never been hallucinated into existence.
People can hallucinate this kind of nonsense
in writing textbooks and books in academia,
but in the real world, people don't hallucinate money.
People are very careful about what they put their money in.
For people listening, we're gonna have fun in this conversation.
Cause you're like, you already said Marxist,
fraud, hallucination, just because we use these words
doesn't mean they're true, but they're fun to talk about.
So you have a strong certainty about the way you talk,
which I think is fun.
But allow me in my dumb self to push back,
to play devil's advocate, and I'll actually ask you sometimes
to play devil's advocate if possible,
cause you're smarter than me on all this stuff.
So we want the smartest devil's advocate possible.
And I'm certainly not that.
But anyway, so, but nevertheless,
we are currently on a fiat standard.
So money does have value, paper money,
and the reason it has value is because
we believe it has value.
To what degree, if we put the hallucination word aside,
the belief that something is worth value
is actually value is the thing that helps money work.
Cause you're saying it's fraud and the belief
is almost valueless.
But how much value, can we quantify the value of the belief,
the collective belief?
I should say like, all economics is subjective.
I consider myself an Austrian school economist
and the starting point of all Austrian economics
is that all value is subjective.
So obviously, value only exists
because humans choose to make the valuation.
However, the economic reality of the way that money works
means that it's just a technology like all others.
And so for me, when people say, well,
if we hallucinate that this thing can be money,
then it'll be money.
If we can hallucinate bananas to be money,
For me, it's like saying, well,
if we hallucinate that bananas can be spaceships,
they'll be spaceships.
I mean, you can call them spaceships
if you want, but a banana's not gonna get you to the moon.
With it, nevertheless, that's true.
So you're drawing a big distinction
between physical reality and the space of belief.
But it seems like so much power of human civilization,
so much destruction, so much creativity,
creation happens in our minds.
So absolutely.
Everything does happen in the minds.
You're not gonna get to the moon,
but you might still have a significant impact
on human civilization if a lot of people believe a thing.
True, but economic reality exists in a way
in which your beliefs are rewarded
when they match up with economic reality.
With this reality.
And they're punished when they don't.
So if you ride a banana, jump off a cliff,
thinking you're gonna get to the moon,
that solves the problem of people thinking
the bananas are spaceships by killing people
who think that bananas are spaceships.
And I think to go back to your question
in terms of paper monies.
So yes, even though ignoring the original sin
of the creation of fiat money
and ignoring everything that happened before 1971,
all right, well, here we are.
People are using, well, it's not really paper money.
And we should say like fiat money is predominantly credit.
So like, it's also digital currency.
So more than 90% of dollars are digital.
Less than 10% of dollars are physical.
So it is a digital currency.
And all over the world,
all these governments are using digital currencies effectively
with some physical manifestations in paper.
But yet even within these currencies,
it's still the same analysis.
And I discussed this in chapter four of the Bitcoin standard.
You look at government monies,
you see that the currencies that have held onto their value,
the ones that have the biggest value,
the ones that play the biggest role in global trade,
the ones that are used as currency reserves
all over the world,
are the ones that have the lowest supply growth rates.
The ones that grow, whose central banks
are the least inflationary.
And on the other hand,
the ones that who supplies more inflationary
similar to copper end up failing.
You look at Lebanon, Venezuela, as in Bobway.
These are currencies whose supply increases very quickly.
And therefore their value collapses.
Whereas the dollar, the Swiss franc, the euro,
the British bound, the Japanese yen,
they increase at a much lower rate in general
than these terrible currencies.
And that's why all over the world,
you see people are looking to get more dollars
and more of these harder currencies than the easier ones.
So I think this analysis of the hardness of the money
and the ease of money is pretty well supported,
empirically.
So like you said, you're at least in part
or in whole consider yourself an Austrian economist.
So you're perhaps a great person to ask about the basics.
What is Austrian economics?
What is Kenzian economics?
How do you compare the two?
What should people know some interest?
What are the interesting defining characteristics
to you about these schools of thought?
So Austrian economics, the way that I say it,
Austrian economics is economics.
It's, we call it Austrian economics
because economics has been hijacked by a bunch of frauds.
People who are wrong.
Well, it's much worse than wrong
by people who are just essentially propagandists
for inflation.
So it's like your opinion, man.
Yeah, well, that's also like your opinion, man.
Yeah, that's true.
Well, I also talked to Paul Krugman on this podcast.
So he's, the O speaks enough,
but he's one of the people that is perhaps most harshly
criticized by folks in Austrian economics perspective
and vice versa, which is a fascinating tension.
Yeah, he's done a great job as an actor
who plays an economist on TV and the internet.
So anyway, now tell me what you really think.
No, but so the basics of what is Austrian economics?
What is the, what perspective does it take in the world?
Yeah, so I mean, Austrian economics really is
the continuation of tradition that it goes back
to the ancient Greeks of studying economics.
Historically, it's really just economics
and that has evolved over time
and the establishment of the Austrian school per se
came in 1871, 150 years ago, when Karl Manger,
the father of the school wrote a book
called Principles of Economics
and essentially invented marginal analysis,
which is a big deal in economics.
Marginal analysis is the idea that in economics,
individuals carry out decisions at the margin.
That it's, when you make choice, you're not making it,
for instance, if you're making a choice
between what should I spend my money on?
You're not making a choice whether it is,
this thing is object A or B,
which one is more valuable for me in general,
which one is more valuable for me for the rest of my life.
You're choosing about the next unit right now
at this point at this stage.
And if you analyze economic decision making at the margin,
it makes a lot more sense
and you can understand why people decide
and make the decisions that they do.
Whereas if you don't apply marginal analysis,
things don't make sense.
The key thing that marginal analysis helps us solve
is what is called the water diamond paradox.
So you will die without water.
We all need water and yet water is dirt cheap.
Whereas diamonds are extremely superfluous,
nobody needs them.
Nobody is gonna live or die because they have a diamond
and yet they're extremely expensive.
So why is it that as human beings,
we pay maybe say a dollar a liter for water,
whereas we pay thousands of dollars
for a few grams of diamonds.
Why is this the case?
Do we value water less than diamond?
The answer is no.
But at the margin where we are right now,
you live in a place where water is very abundant
because cities are only built in places
where water is abundant.
And you're only making a choice
about the next unit of water.
And so water is extremely abundant
and you're choosing about whether to spend
the next unit of money on water.
The valuation that you give to water
given that you have a lot of water at home
and that you live in a place that has abundant water
is pretty low to the marginal unit.
But it's very high for water overall.
So if I asked you how much would you spend
for water in general?
How much would you pay for water for all of your life?
It would be a lot higher than diamonds.
If I told you you can only have water or diamonds
for the rest of your life, you choose water obviously.
But nobody's ever had to make that choice.
You only make your choices at the margin.
So at the margin where we are, modern civilization,
we have an abundance of water.
That's why we have civilization.
And diamonds are very rare and scarce.
And people are only buying, you buy your first diamond
when you're gonna get married, you give it to your wife.
And that's gonna be the first few grams of diamond
that she's ever gonna own.
Giving my wife water.
Smart move.
You should definitely give her bitcoin instead of diamonds.
I tell my wife, I occasionally remind her
how many bitcoin we could have had
if I bought her bitcoin with the price of the diamond ring.
What's the downside of, by the way,
diamonds from the analysis of gold and so on?
It's a great question.
Arguably diamonds are a scam.
Because they became popular as a thing in marriage
after gold was banned,
after gold ownership was banned in the US in the 1930s
and in many places around the world.
So before that, you'd give gold.
And the reason you'd give gold in a dowry in a wedding
is because it wasn't just that it's pretty and shiny,
it's because it's money.
And so if you die, your wife can take the gold
and she can live off of it.
It's a demonstration that you're giving her
something valuable.
And that's because nobody can make a lot more gold
that has the high stock to flow ratio.
But then they banned gold ownership
or they allowed people to only own
very tiny quantities of gold.
And that's when the diamond industry stepped in
and marketed diamonds as the thing that you need to give.
But the problem with it is, of course,
that diamonds aren't like gold.
They're not very hard to make more of.
And the reason we have scarcity in diamonds
is really artificial.
There's effectively a monopoly of diamond producers.
They restrict the supply and it's a pretty dirty business.
And the way that they do it is all of us
talk about blood diamonds is a way for them
to ensure their monopoly.
So if you're part of the monopoly of diamond producers,
then it doesn't matter how many people get killed
producing your diamonds.
If you're out of the monopoly,
then human rights organizations descend on you
and call for shutting you down for selling blood diamonds.
And they're also restricting
the production of artificial diamonds.
This is the other thing.
You can make artificial diamond,
you can't make artificial gold.
So they restrict the production of artificial diamond
and they try and insist that you shouldn't
take artificial diamonds,
but they're indistinguishable from real diamonds.
So it's an artificial scarcity
and I think there's gonna come a point at some point
that this monopoly is gonna break
and a lot of people are gonna be left with
essentially highly devalued jewelry.
I'm gonna take this segment of the podcast.
When I'm getting married, when the sun did,
and then instead you're getting water or Bitcoin.
Yes, water and Bitcoin is all you need.
So marginal analysis, focusing on the margin
is the thing that allows you
to most accurately capture human nature,
the actual day to day decisions that we humans make.
Yeah, that's really revolutionized economics, so 1870.
And that was Manger's work.
And then he had a student,
Eugen Bomberg, who developed capital theory.
And then he had a student, Ludwig von Mises,
who is arguably the most important economist ever.
And he developed a theory of money
and he wrote a book in 1912
called The Theory of Money and Credit.
And then in the 40s, he wrote Human Action,
which is a big treatise on economics.
And I think this is the correct tradition of economics.
And before World War I, this was just known as economics.
And then after what happened in World War I,
and I discussed this in detail in the fiat standard,
is that the Bank of England essentially went off gold
and tried to pass off their own credit
as being as good as gold in order to finance the war.
And incidentally here,
this is part of the history that is not discussed often here.
This is presented as an innovation.
Later on, they needed essentially a propaganda school
that would justify what they did.
And later on, it's presented as,
oh, hey, we realized that gold was not good.
And now look, we've built this thing
that is better than gold,
where now the government can just print money
whenever it wants.
And now gold money is not an issue anymore,
which is extremely idiotic
because the whole point of money is that it's not easy to make.
If it's easy to make, it's not money anymore.
It's just destroying the entire function of money.
And we've seen that happen extensively in the 20th century
after countries went off the gold standard.
So essentially, Keynesian economics
is just inflation apologia.
It's just propaganda to justify inflationism.
And it's profoundly nonsensical.
It's built on the idea that if you just make more money,
you can stimulate economic production.
And of course, this is very self serving
to the central banks and to the banks
and to the governments who promote this nonsense.
And this is also very pervasive.
If you've had them as fortunate of studying
at a university over the last century,
you were taught Keynesian garbage economics.
You were taught that if there's a problem in the economy,
the way to fix it is that the government prints money,
the government lowers the interest rate,
and then that leads to more economic production,
which is completely nonsensical.
So you're, again, for the listener,
you're using strong words and I will push back
just to please devil's advocate
to hopefully one day arrive at the truth.
So just because it's in the interest
of the central banks and the government,
the interests and the models of Keynesian economics
and the government are aligned doesn't mean they're wrong.
So let's give them a chance.
So the conventional wisdom, perhaps economics wisdom
is that inflation is good in moderation
as it encourages spending, but too much is bad
because it completely devalues, destroys people's savings.
So a little bit of inflation is good to stimulate spending.
And I mean, I suppose this is one of the things
that's supported by Keynesian economics.
Why is that wrong?
This is basically the whole point of Keynesian economics,
is to try and find an endless array of explanations
to explain why inflation is a good thing.
Well, the chicken and egg.
So that's the cynical take.
This is a propaganda machine
to sell the government's narrative.
The less cynical take is there's a bunch of economists
who figured out this thing
and it happens to be good for banks and governments.
And just because it's good for them doesn't mean.
And it justifies the existence of government
and your basic, I don't think it's your basic assumption,
but a foundational principle of your thought
is that a lot of government is not a good thing.
Your first gut instinct, government bad.
Like I mentioned, I live next door in Michael Malus
who probably beats you on the intensity
and how quickly he says government bad.
So there's a potential argument for government good.
Some government is good, maybe a lot of government is good.
Maybe we need a lot of centralized management
for resource allocation and so on
because we humans specialize, we're too busy and so on.
So there's an argument for that that exists.
You probably disagree with any possible argument on that side,
but anyway, so why is that idea of Kenzen economics wrong?
I'm gonna focus for this on the money idea,
the idea that a little bit of inflation is good.
The idea here, I mean, the criticism is that
without inflation, people wouldn't spend
and then the economy would come to a grinding halt.
And that's nonsensical because people spend
not because they wanna keep this magical monster
called the economy going,
people spend because they need to consume
because that's how we live, that's how we survive.
You need to eat, you need shelter,
you need clothes to keep you warm.
And as technology advances,
the capabilities of the things that we can do
with our time increases and so we wanna buy more things.
So people buy things because people want to consume.
There's a limitless desire to consume.
That there's no shortage of reasons for people to consume
whether it's food or Ferraris or private jets,
people just always wanna buy more.
Can I interrupt just really quick?
What about the fear about the uncertainty of the future
where they might want to buy things,
but they're really afraid because it seems like
there's a lot like a pandemic going on or whatever it is.
Yeah, that's good.
So fear of uncertainty is good.
Can you have too much fear of uncertainty?
Here's the thing, what I was saying is
I was making the point that
we don't need to be motivated to consume.
We have the insatiable desire to consume.
Everybody would like to have more of all kinds of things.
Everybody would like to have a bigger house.
Well, not everybody, some people have a big enough house,
but everybody would like a house.
Everybody would like a car, jet, all kinds of things,
electronics, machines.
So we don't need a desire to consume.
But of course, the limit on how much we consume
is opportunity cost.
Why don't you buy a Ferrari?
Well, because that's really expensive
and it would mean that, well, maybe you do have a Ferrari,
but I mean, most people don't buy a Ferrari
because it's too expensive, they can't afford it.
They'd have to work too hard to get it.
And if they do get it, it might mean
that they can't afford their house anymore.
So we have to economize, that's a good thing.
And we have to also think of the future.
And so humans consume, that we don't need more motivation
to consume, we have to deal with the economic reality
of the things that limit us from consuming more.
So what Keynesians present is that
when there is a problem in the economy,
like there was after World War I,
the problem is always caused by the inflation.
And what the Keynesian Hucksters do
is that they look at the consequences of inflation
and blame it on people not spending enough.
When people are doing the rational thing,
the money is, so there was inflation,
caused an unsustainable boom, it caused a recession,
and now a lot of people lost their jobs
and they don't have enough money to go out
and spend frivolously.
So they save for the future, the future is uncertain.
That's a good thing, that's how you fix things.
You begin the recovery by, well, you lost some wealth
so you spend less, like if your business goes bust,
if you lose your job, it's natural and smart
that you stop spending money on the frivolous thing
that you used to spend, and you save it for the future,
and you invest in something else, you get a new job,
and then once you've recovered, you start spending more.
This is very sane and very good,
and it's the way to recovery.
But essentially the Keynesians have used this
as a justification for more inflation,
because inflation is an addiction.
Once the government gets down the path
of spending money to solve its problems,
then every problem looks like it can be solved
by more inflation.
And so this is where Keynesian economics comes in,
and of course the Keynesian economics is based
on the work of Keynes, which came in the 1930s.
And this is the key point, like it's portrayed
in the textbook as if it's just this scientific breakthrough
that somebody in the 1930s, this genius came about
and realized that, oh, we don't actually need gold.
We don't need hard money.
We can actually just print all the money.
And in reality, of course, it was just the very thin,
flimsy, idiotic justification for what governments
were already doing for 20 years.
They'd already gone off the gold standard,
and they'd gone through 20 years in which they were lying
to their population, telling their population,
we're still on a gold standard,
but that our problems caused by various random things.
But don't worry, we're gonna be going back
on the gold standard.
20 years later, after they went off the gold standard,
they come up with this justification for why,
oh, actually, the gold standard was bad,
and this is a really pernicious thing about it,
is the problems that were caused by us going
off the gold standard were caused by the gold standard.
And we're going to fix them by going off
the gold standard even more.
Just because government is lying and it's shady
and it does these kinds of things
doesn't mean Kenzian economics is wrong.
So just, because I wanted to separate a few things you said,
it could very well be very wrong,
and they could indeed be hucksters.
All of these, such colorful language,
I love you deeply for this, this is fun.
Yeah, but I mean, it's not like somebody like Krugman
doesn't use this kind of language when discussing Austrians.
It's just that when actors like him use it,
it's presented as if it is legitimate
because he's part of the major shows.
So the case they make, and the criticism
Kenzians make of Austrian economics,
and the case they make for Kenzian economics
is it's based on empirical evidence.
So Austrian economists are pie in the sky,
theorists about how human nature works,
and it's just all theory.
And just like you said, Kenzian economics
kind of sell it as a science, data driven science.
And so where's the data, bro, on the Austrian?
So one way of saying it is
how do you know if we get rid of inflation?
How do you know if we get rid of central banks?
If we push towards that direction,
we will have a better world, a better functioning economy,
better functioning markets, better functioning society.
This is another inaccurate way
in which they present the economics.
They present as if it's just theory
and the data doesn't matter, but that's not the case.
What the Austrians say is that without guiding theory,
data is mute, data is dumb, data can't say anything.
So theory first, and then you have to have models
to provide context for interpretation of the data.
Exactly, and it's a sign of just how little self awareness
they have that they think that they're just being led
by the data when they're being led
by Kenz's moronic theories.
And they use the data to justify those theories
and to stick by them.
And in fact, they are the ones whose theories
cannot be refuted because it's just government
mandated religion.
So according to Kenz's nonsense, so the way
that the whole thing is, the way that they justify
the inflationism is this, and I'm just using this
to give an example of what you're talking about
in terms of theory, the way they justify the inflationism
to tie it back to the original point,
they justify the, all right, we need the money to spend.
And then the level of spending in the economy
is what determines the state of the economy.
And I've taught macroeconomics at university level
for a while, so I know this.
I know Keynesian nonsense better than most Keynesians,
no Austrians, if not all of them, I guarantee you.
And so the way they see it is the level of spending
in the economy is what determines the state of the economy.
There's a level of output and there's a level of spending.
So there's like the factories on the one side
that are churning out goods, and those goods have
a certain quantity and value, market value,
is completely nonsensical, of course,
because how can the value of the goods produced
be different from the value of the spending?
But let's put that aside for a second.
So the amount of spending that happens in the economy
determines the state of the economy.
If the value of the production, which they call Y,
is higher than the aggregate expenditure,
so this is the production, and the aggregate expenditure
is lower, then we don't have enough spending
to buy all the goods, and then that causes a recession.
The factories start laying off workers,
and then the laid off workers start spending less,
and then that leads to aggregate expenditure
dropping even further, and so it's a vicious cycle
where the economy gets into recession,
and the only way out is for Keynes's banks to buddies
and government buddies to print a lot of money
to give to themselves, and then that will...
That's one interpreter, so to print more money,
to increase the expenditure, to match the supply...
To match the level of output.
Sounds pretty good to me, I'm sold.
All right.
Even though you're saying Huckster, so...
Yes.
You know, the way... I love you very much,
but just for people who are listening,
I think it's... I love the way you talk,
and it's great, and keep doing it, but just for context,
like I don't know anything that involves human nature
deserves this level of certainty.
I, at least my position is that we don't know
what the hell we're doing on basically anything, and...
Perhaps, but I mean...
Like, there's a lot... Like, certainty can get us in trouble,
is my worry.
I don't know much about economics.
I don't even know financial systems, monetary systems,
but I just seen us get in trouble with human psychology.
Certainty.
Certainty of ideologies in general.
You mentioned Marxism and so on.
I came from the Soviet Union.
There's a lot of people that are very certain
throughout the history of the 20th century
that communism is the utopia that humanity should strive for.
So I'm nervous around certainty.
I could be wrong, but you ask me for my opinion.
Yes, yes.
Sorry, so it's that little bit of a caveat.
So to go back to the idea, then on the other hand,
you have the level of...
If the other situation is when the level of spending
is higher than the amount of aggregate output.
In that situation, you have too much spending,
so therefore what ends up happening is inflation.
So according to the Keynesian worldview,
this is really important because this is a way
that I'm gonna get to your point about empirical data
and to show you why they're not correct.
Yeah, they're not correct about what they say
about empirical data.
So then what this means is that there's a level of output
and there's a level of aggregate expenditure.
The aggregate expenditure can either be higher
or lower than the output or equal to it.
If it's higher, we get inflation.
If it's lower, we get recessions, okay?
So is there any universe in this model?
Is there any post potential universe
in which you can have both inflation and a recession?
According to the Keynesian model, you can't, right?
Because aggregate expenditure cannot be both higher
and lower than output.
So therefore, if you were truly being an empirical person,
if you were looking at evidence and trying to be,
trying to analyze data, you'd look at this
and say one example, you just need one example
of high inflation and high unemployment
to refute this entire model, right?
And of course, the world is full of examples
of high inflation and high unemployment.
And that's what happened in the 19th,
and of course, they ignored it when it happens
in poor countries because poor countries don't really matter.
But then in the 1970s, that happened in the US
and in the Western economies
and the most advanced industrial economies.
So historically, before then,
you had all these Keynesian central bankers
talking about this model and saying, you know,
well, aggregate expenditure is too low now
and that's why we have unemployment.
So we need to print more money.
And then they print more money, inflation goes up,
but also unemployment goes up
because this model is broken.
That's not how the world works.
That's not, the level of aggregate spending
in the economy is not a lever
with which you can control inflation and unemployment.
So what would a scientist do?
What would a nonhuxter do in this case?
Admit the theories wrong
and find another way to reformulate it.
Have the Keynesians done that?
No, still the same garbage in the textbook
that is being taught until today.
So is it possible to have a non Keynesian model
where one that still supports moderate amount
of inflation is good for the economy?
I mean, since the 1970s, since this has happened,
yeah, this is what basically most fiat economists
as I like to call them,
essentially anybody at a university financed by governments
which is financed by central banks,
which is financed by fiat.
We'll talk about that.
The effect of fiat money on our life
as you write about in your book, fiat standard,
one of them is education.
I'm sure we'll disagree there too.
Not smart enough to disagree, but I'll disagree anyway.
So yeah, so a whole bunch of other models came up,
but basically it's such an example of motivated reasoning.
Like anybody who's got a familiarity
with the scientific method or who's got an engineering
background who comes into economics
immediately has a lot of red flags.
And I remember when I used to teach macroeconomics,
I used to teach introductory macroeconomics
and it's a course that would be taken by econ majors
as well as engineers.
A lot of engineers would take it as an elective.
And every time I'd explain the,
and I would just teach the Keynesian basic stuff.
And every time I'd explain it,
there's always that smart engineering kid
who just looks at me and says,
sir, this doesn't make any sense
because this and this and that.
And I'm always like, you get it.
Exactly, you're correct.
Because if you have any kind of shred
of scientific thinking, you see
that this is all motivated reasoning.
Like the answer is government needs to print money.
And here's a whole bunch of models
brought up by people for why government printing money
is good.
And the reason they're coming up to this conclusion
is that you only get funded if you come up
with this conclusion.
If you come up with a conclusion
that we need to shut down the central bank,
you don't get funded by the central bank.
You don't get published in the journals.
You don't get a job at the prestigious universities.
You don't get quoted by fiat publications
like the New York Times and CNN.
They don't invite you on as an expert.
Well, that's a fundamental flaw
with a lot of institutions we have today.
And throughout human history.
Let me zoom out for just a second to the big question.
What is economics in general?
What's the goal?
You said there's a bunch of models.
Is any economist basically trying to throw a bunch
of models about human behavior on the table
and try to generalize it to the global scale?
So both dance between micro and macro somehow
in order to determine public policy
and explain the past, predict the future,
prescribe policies that can control the future,
those kinds of things.
That's the big, basic, ridiculous question.
What is economics?
Economics is the study, the way the Austrians define it
is the study of how humans make choices
under the condition of scarcity.
And we begin with the starting point of economics
as the fact that scarcity exists.
And why does scarcity exist?
Well, because it's easier to want things
than it is to make them.
It's much easier to want a Ferrari than it is to make one.
And so because we have wants and we have limited means
to meet those wants, we need to economize.
It's a permanent marker of the human condition.
We are always economizing at all times.
And so how people make those decisions
under the conditions of scarcity is what economists study.
So to go back to your point on empiricism
in Austrian school, so it isn't that the Austrians
don't believe in data.
On the contrary, it's that theory has to inform data.
And in fact, if you think about it,
as the example of the stagflation of the 1970s shows,
if you have stagflation, that just completely refutes
the Keynesian model.
The Austrian way of thinking, which is think
from first principles, understand how the world
actually works, think about how humans act,
and understand that economics is really all
about human action.
So it's not about aggregates of goods.
This is really the key distinction
in terms of methodology for the Keynesians.
It's physics envy.
They look at the market economy,
that it could individuals in the market economy,
and they think that they can understand
the market economy by looking at aggregates.
This is really the key point of what I think
makes the certain branch of economics pseudoscientific
is the introduction of aggregates.
When you introduce those aggregates,
how much production takes place,
how many people are unemployed,
the percentage of the inflation rate,
and then you think that you can establish
scientific relationship between those aggregates.
It's purely physics envy.
In physics, for instance, or in chemistry,
you put, let's say, a container with contains a gas,
and you have the ideal gas law, pv equals to nrt.
Calculate the pressure, calculate the volume,
and then the temperature.
You can, if you have the pressure and volume,
you can calculate the temperature
because you have the nrt constants.
So there's a clear relationship
that has been demonstrated in a laboratory,
and that we can do it right now.
We can measure it, and we can see it,
and it's continuous to hold.
And all it takes is one scientist
to show that this relationship does not hold,
to do an experiment that shows that this does not hold,
and it stops being a law of chemistry,
and it's broken.
Whereas in economics, what they've done
is they've copied the superficial shape of this
without any of the scientific rigor
that was used to build it.
There's no experiments.
You can't experiment on economies.
We don't have the ability to establish laws,
and all the laws that we establish
are just models that get people published
and get them on the media to say,
my model says we need to print more money,
but it's never subject to actual scientific scrutiny.
If it were, they would all be rejected in 15 minutes
because the world is full of examples that contradict them.
Was it possible to do scientific scrutiny
when it's human nature, when there's a nearly infant number
of variables, and you can't control them?
So what's the best thing you could possibly do?
You do thought experiments.
But the problem with thought experiments,
Freud thinks everybody wants to have sex with their mother.
Is he right?
That's the problem with Freud.
I don't know, maybe he's right.
Well, obviously, I'm joking on that front,
but Freud is probably under the canes.
Well, no, I think there's power to the thought experiment.
Just like Einstein, a lot of general relativity,
special relativity, that's a thought experiment.
It originates in a thought experiment.
Now, is it true?
A nice thing about physics,
you can't eventually have experiment to validation.
The downside of economics is you really can't have
experimental, definitive experimental scientific rigor
of validation of a theory.
So a thought experiment is just a thought experiment
using your intuition.
It's the power of reasoning together about human nature.
And that's why economics cannot make the claims
that physics can make.
So with physics, you can predict that if you get this gas
at this pressure, at this volume,
the temperature will be that much.
And you can make that prediction
and test it a million times
and you'll always get the precisely correct answer.
With economics, we can't make quantitative predictions.
But still, on Twitter, and even today,
you're very certain about the statements you're making.
Do you?
Yeah, but I don't make quantitatively certain statements.
That's the thing.
In economics, we don't make quantitative predictions.
We cannot do that because we don't have experiments.
But we can understand how the world actually works
with humility.
This is really the key difference,
that the Keynesians think they just want to copy
the methods of physics,
and then that's just gonna give them the certainty
of the results of physics.
Which is like me saying,
I'm just gonna put a red blanket on my back
and jump from the fourth floor because I'm Superman.
Well, it's not the red blanket that's gonna make me Superman.
It does a lot more to it.
So humility manifests itself in economics
as the belief in a free market.
Meaning like, I can't centralize,
I can't do centralized control on this thing.
We're going to minimize the friction of the free exchange
of goods.
So Austrian economics puts priority in the market.
Yes, and you could arrive at it through two paths.
The more practical path,
which most scientific minded people arrive at,
and I came from an engineering background.
So I initially had this idea
that what is lacking in economics is mathematicization.
We need to have better math models.
We need to get all of those tools from engineering,
apply them to economics,
and then we'll be able to plan the world economy
and make it work better.
And then you start actually trying to solve problems,
trying to actually calculate them.
And you realize nobody can have that ability
because the difference ultimately comes down to the fact,
we can't have experiments.
And the reason we can't have experiments
is that you can experiment on particles of a gas.
You can't experiment on human beings and entire economies.
And because particles of a gas are just dumb matter.
And so you kick matter in a certain way,
you can calculate exactly how much is going to fly.
Human beings are much more complex.
They have a will inside them.
And this is really,
this is the humility to understand
that you are a human being
and other people are also human being just like you.
And that the, you know, every person wakes up every morning
and they have a million things in their mind,
a million things they care about,
a million things they want to do.
And you will never be able to make the decisions
for somebody else,
let alone for millions of other people.
So this is one path by which you arrive
at the conclusion that free markets are better
because you realize that all of the people
that think that they can centrally plan markets
can't actually do that.
And that there's really nothing scientific about them,
except essentially the rituals they ape
of the scientific process.
And the other path I think that makes you arrive
at the Austrian perspective
or at the libertarian perspective I should say
is simply the notion of individuals
as having their own inalienable right
to decide what they want to do with themselves.
If you, I mean, the only way that you can give yourself
the idea that you get to be planner
is ultimately you think you're better than other people.
You think your choice, your judgment overrides mine.
And I don't think that's a defensible position.
I think I'm in no position to want to force anybody ever.
I will never want to force anybody
to do anything they don't want.
The Keynesian perspective,
the central planning perspective is unlike physics,
which is let's force a bunch of particles
to sit in the lab so that we can study them.
In economics, you're forcing people to do things.
Let's stop these people from doing this job
because it's bad for the economy
and let's get them to do that job.
Let's force them to pay this price.
Let's tax them this much.
Let's prevent them from using gold as money
and force them to use our credit as money.
So it has to rely on coercion.
There's no central planning without coercion.
And coercion is a crime in my opinion.
There's no way that it is justifiable morally
or absolutely.
So from a politics, from an ethical perspective,
your view is the, I mean, perhaps broadly speaking,
the libertarian view is coercion is the unethical.
Freedom is essential.
What is, what are the pros and cons
of government intervention in the economy?
So can you steal, can you provide pros?
You just kind of provided arguments against,
is there any arguments to be made
for government intervention,
for the role of government in society?
Speaking from a political or from an economics perspective,
what is the positive role of government
that you can imagine you can speak to?
I can repeat many other cases,
but I don't find any of them compelling
for the reason that I mentioned,
which is that ultimately they all rely on
putting a gun to somebody's head
and using the threat of force.
So that's for me, it can never be justifiable.
Whatever the ends are,
if the means are violence and the threat of violence,
then the ends aren't justified.
Everything that's good,
governments will use as an excuse
to justify coercion.
So, what do you like?
You like motherhood and apple pie?
Well, government needs to ensure
that motherhood works well
and we need government central planning of birth.
We need regulations on birth, for instance.
We need regulations on how people give birth.
We need to ban people from giving birth
in traditional ways that have been tried
for thousands of years.
We need to force people to do things
in the modern scientific way.
Well, so what about things like
that all of us use, so infrastructure, for example,
or education, or well, the economy too, right?
Can you make a case for the role
of some large scale centralized systems,
whether it's government or not,
that do this kind of management?
I guess perhaps you could say
there's the economies of scale argument
that some things must exist at a very large scale
and therefore you would want political accountability
of the people who manage them.
This is kind of the argument
that's given for infrastructure monopolies,
for instance, roads or electricity.
Let's say we live in a country, we need one power plant.
The bigger the power plant, the better off we will all be.
And there's a natural monopoly in the power plant business.
So we're gonna have to have one power plant
and since it's only one power plant,
then we can't just let anybody own it
because then they're gonna make it too expensive.
So we need to have the government own it.
So it can make it too expensive.
And you don't find that case compelling?
Not at all.
I used to believe in it.
I was pretty much a Keynesian
when I first started my graduate studies at Columbia.
And no, I don't find that compelling at all
because I think all these examples
that they mentioned of natural monopolies
or economies of scale that can only fit
at a scale of government, it's always,
it's always, government bans people
from opening power plants.
And then there's only one power plant
and they need to be in charge of it.
But in reality, no, in reality,
power plants can exist at all kinds of manners
of scales of operation.
And yes, of course, there are benefits to centralization
in power plants in particular
because there's efficiency in generation.
One big power plant is more efficient
than 10 equivalent smaller power plants.
But there's also inefficiencies in centralization
because the more centralized and the bigger the plant is,
the further away a lot of the population is going to be.
So you're gonna be losing a lot
of the electricity and transmission.
And you believe the free market is best in managing
that dance, that balance of how centralization.
Exactly, and if we do end up in a situation
where there's one power plant for an area,
then if the market ends up centralizing all of it
into one power plant, I don't see that as a problem.
There are places, there's a small town
with only one barbershop.
Is that a catastrophe?
No, because they don't need two barbershops.
Now, if that barbershop started to take advantage of people,
started to charge higher price,
well, then that's just an opportunity
for others to step in and put them in their place.
And that's the same thing with power plants,
it's the same thing with everything.
Ultimately, I think the key thing is this,
from the central planning perspective,
they'll present you the problem as it is
and they'll tell you, well, this is bad.
So the fix, and what we can do is better.
So let's stop what's bad and do what is better.
Two problems here, usually the reason
that the thing is bad in the first place
is because it is a government monopoly,
it's because of government intervention.
But the second thing is that this notion
that we could just pass a law and fix what's wrong
and make it better, it ignores the fundamental
underlying reality, which is that what you're doing is
you're offering only one way for this problem to be solved
and making all other solutions practically illegal.
You're taking taxpayer money,
you're putting guns to people's heads,
to take their money, to use it to build, say,
this one solution for a power plant,
but you're preventing the free market process
from providing us with other alternatives.
Well, so you phrased it from that perspective,
but in theory, there is a feedback accountability mechanism
for the solution that you propose and enforce
by, as you're saying, placing a gun to people's head,
you're accountable for that choice,
for the quality of that solution by being voted out
if the solution is actually bad.
So it's just a different selection mechanism.
And I think I personally believe
it is a selection mechanism that has worked in the past.
It just often does not work nearly as well as a free market.
And the question is, are there domains
in which the free market gets itself into trouble?
So this theoretical view is that
that's the point of a free market,
is it doesn't, if there's trouble, that's a signal
and it will respond to that signal
and it will respond appropriately
to make you try to maximize happiness.
The question is, is there a local optima
that free markets get stuck in and need governments
to represent the broader scale of the people
to get outside of that?
I think the fundamental problem here
is the idea that there is a feedback mechanism
when there is coercion in one party,
when one party can employ coercion
and the other one cannot.
So in other words, I'm gonna put a gun to your head,
I'm gonna take your money,
and I'm gonna use it to buy more guns for me
to put against your head.
But somehow, you're gonna put a paper in a box
and that's going to deactivate my guns.
Well, love requires a push and pull,
a little bit of tension, a little spice in a relationship,
I think.
Yeah, I mean...
A little gun to the head,
not sometimes.
Good luck to anybody who's gonna be dating you
if you think you're putting a gun to people's head,
it's comparable to a relationship.
All jokes.
But yes, I mean, the people don't often think of it
as gun to the head, as government and the military
as gun to the head.
But that is sort of a libertarian perspective
because ultimately when you, you know,
turtles all the way down and at the bottom, there's guns.
Yeah, so at the bottom, if you don't wanna pay,
if you don't wanna, you know,
all right, I don't wanna be part of your power plant,
I wanna get my own generator, I don't wanna do it,
and I don't wanna pay for it.
You go to jail, you can't not pay for it.
That's really the asymmetry,
which the market doesn't have,
which is why, in my opinion,
it's not as if, you know, I'm being stubborn
and stuck on the idea that I want a market
and that the government can't work.
It's presented as if, you know,
we're choosing between two different machines,
you know, should we use an Apple or a PC?
And I'm just constantly choosing one of them
and saying that the other government can't work.
It's not equivalent, it's not two machines.
We're comparing between a machine and a gun to the head.
And we're comparing between a situation in which
anybody anywhere is free to provide the service
or the good and anybody anywhere is free to buy it from them
or reject to buy it from them.
So anyone can build a power plant.
Anyone can succeed, anybody can fail at it.
Anybody can build it in a way that I can choose
to take part in or not take part in.
I can build my own.
So we have a situation in which 10 million people,
let's say, they each can freely choose
to provide the good or to buy the good.
That cannot be considered an alternative
on an equal footing to a situation where one person
or one entity gets to decide for everybody
and those who disagree go to jail.
So the problem is that the alternative to governments
is other large successful entities
that have humans in them and human nature is such
that there's corruption manipulation and so on.
I think free market depends on the honest communication
of information as widely as possible
so people can make great rational decisions.
But sort of my fear is that like the proposal is
that in general there's manipulation
whether it's government, whether it's companies,
they're going to manipulate,
they're going to try to do propaganda,
they're going to try to manipulate you, deceive you,
shut down competition by playing games,
human games of different kinds.
And sometimes even meaning well,
it's not like everybody thinks they're doing good
and they're actually doing evil.
So how do we prevent the worst of human nature coming out
in a free market as well?
By not giving the worst of human nature a monopoly
on violence in the institution of governments.
That little inkling of coercion,
that little bit of asymmetry creates a gigantic,
like ripple effect of asymmetry in your view.
Yes, and it ends up just being the place where,
you know, corporations, individuals, free markets,
they can't coerce without the resort to government.
So, you know, you think about all the examples
of corrupt corporations doing bad things,
it's always because they have certain privileges
from governments because, you know, as it exists,
you know, Coca Cola, McDonald's,
all of these giant corporations,
they can't do anything to me without government.
They can't take any of my money
and they can't force me to buy their stuff.
And so doesn't matter to me, you know,
so if Coca Cola is corrupted,
that's a problem for Coca Cola customers,
that's a problem for Coca Cola shareholders,
that's a problem for anybody who deals with Coca Cola,
but as somebody who doesn't drink their stuff
and isn't a shareholder,
I have absolutely no interest in what happens.
They could all go bust tomorrow and I don't care.
I don't buy their product and I'm not a shareholder.
So in this situation where you choose to voluntarily
associate with people and you only give your money
to people you want to voluntarily give the money to,
so you either buy their product
or invest in their production, in that situation,
the only way that a company can get my money
is if they build the product that I value
or if they convince me that they are going to use it
in a way that's profitable.
And I may be wrong, you know,
I may invest in a company that fails
or I may invest in a company that turns out to be fraudulent,
but that's my fault, you know?
And it's my fault that I gave them my money
and then it turned out to be scoundrels,
but it's a totally different problem
when we make it mandatory, you know?
It's violence, it's a crime to put a gun to my head
and force me to subsidize companies
and force me to come at certain conclusions.
Do you find an interesting distinction,
Mr. Michael Malis, between anarchism and libertarianism?
So this particular use of violence, this like last resort,
this policing force that libertarianism is okay with
and anarchism is not okay with.
So basically nation states that keep you safe
from the worst of war.
Yeah, I think to be more accurate,
the distinction between anarchism and monarchism,
I think libertarianism is kind of a vague term
that can encompass both.
It means a lot of things, okay.
Yeah, but on the Karl Marx to Michael Malis spectrum,
where do you?
No, no, I'm full anarchist.
You're full anarchist.
Yeah, full anarchist.
I mean, I don't find any justification
for the use of force.
And I think recently, perhaps, maybe I'm getting old,
maybe I'm getting senile, maybe I'm getting wise.
Who knows?
But I'm beginning to become more sympathetic to monarchy.
So I'm an anarchist, monarchy.
Which, what is that?
Kings.
Oh, monarchy.
Yeah.
And I think.
Wait, are you joking or not?
No, I'm not joking.
And I think, I mean, I think, you know,
morally and intellectually, I'm an anarchist,
but it's what the reality is we find ourselves
in a world in which a lot of people are not.
And the question is, what is the thing that is going
to provide you with more freedom?
And I think I'm recently coming around to the idea
that monarchy might be the best way
to provide people with the largest amount of freedom
because to have a free society, you need a majority,
perhaps, or a plurality of people
to have a very strong understanding of libertarian ideas,
to have a low time preference,
to have a preference for the future.
So you need a majority of the population
to not decide to go and do something insane
in order to continue to have a free society.
You know, when a respiratory illness comes along,
unfortunately, you know, the last couple of years
showed that we, the vast majority of people
are gonna freak out and lose their mind
and support whatever their stupid TV tells them to support.
And, you know, there's always a current thing
and the media is always telling you
that we need this current thing as an excuse
for more and more government power
and more and more government coercion.
What's the role of kings and queens
in that case of a monarchy?
What's the role of a leader?
I think there might be a case that...
So as I was saying, you need the majority
of the population to get together and decide,
nope, whatever is the case, you know,
the answer is voluntary.
No matter how bad the disease is,
it doesn't justify forcing people to stay home.
You wanna stay home, stay home.
You wanna wear a mask, take a vaccine,
do whatever you want, but you can't force others to do that.
So you need a majority of the people
to strongly believe in this principle
in order to get it in a democracy.
Whereas in a monarchy, you just need the king to get it.
And I think the reason kings are more likely to get it
is that kings have a low time preference
where they think about things for many generations.
Whereas in a democratic system,
your president is likely only going to be there
for four years or eight years or 10 years
or five years or whatever it is.
So the only way that, you know,
all humans are self interested.
So the only way that your president in a democracy
can provide for themselves is to maximize the amount
of exploitation that they can do of the population
during their brief stint.
And then when he's out, you get a new one
and then that one wants to start all over again.
So every four years, you get a new robber.
With monarchy, you sign up for a multi generation
subscription to the same family.
And when they have the security of knowing that, you know,
his great grandson is going to be taking money
from your great grandson, suddenly his interest
in yours align because they both want your great grandson
to be prosperous and have enough money
for his great grandson to take.
So it's a monarchy with a tiny government.
So anything required to really provide for free market.
So for maximize individual freedom
and the freedom of the economy.
Yeah, and if I were a king, which is highly unlikely
to ever happen, but I think, you know,
if you look historically, the dynasties that have succeeded
at lasting for a long time, the key thing that they managed
to do is to basically be libertarian.
The key to being a good king is to just leave people alone,
let them do whatever they want.
Don't rob them too much or rob them as little as possible
or maybe even don't rob them.
And, you know, as a king, use your power only
to punish people who aggress against others.
Don't use your power to enrich yourself
and enrich your friends.
And that's really like, if you look at smart kings,
this is what they do.
This is what they teach their children.
And the cycle of kingdoms is that, you know,
the first king understands this, builds the empire
and the first couple of generations, they get this
and the society is free, the economy is free.
And because of that, you know, there's peace
and prosperity, but then over time, the next generation
of kids become a lot more high time preference.
They haven't worked hard.
They don't understand the meaning of hard work.
So they become more likely to engage
in destructive behavior.
So raise taxes, pass laws that require people
to do things even when they're not hurting anybody.
And that ends up basically eventually
destroying the kingdom.
Of course, power corrupts.
So you have to kind of create human institutions
that prevent you as a king or any kind of leader
from expand.
So going back on the original promises
and the purposes of your position and then distracting,
using tools of technology and communication
to distract the populace while you expend the power.
Exactly.
All right.
You wrote the fiat standard.
I think we danced around it quite a bit,
but I don't know if we actually defined it.
So what is fiat money?
What is the history of how it came to be?
The fascinating history of the birth
of the fiat monetary system is something
that really only got uncovered in 2017.
This is extremely, extremely interesting.
In 1914, Britain joined World War I.
And if you remember your history books,
it's famous that this was called the August Bank holiday.
It was just going to be a few weeks
where the British troops were gonna go
and kick European ass and come back triumphant.
And most European countries believed that.
But then the war kept on dragging on.
And of course, to finance the war, the government,
this is what they used to do under the gold standard,
governments would issue bonds.
So you'd issue the bonds.
People would buy the bonds.
The money would be used to finance the military.
And then the government would pay off the bond
over the next five or 10 or 20 years.
So for World War I, the British government,
the British treasury issued bonds for financing the war.
And this only came to light in 2017.
Only a third of the bonds were actually subscribed.
So people, British people, and this is perhaps
the greatest thing that they've ever done,
they decided fighting a war in Europe
is just not my ideal way of investing my capital.
It's a stupid thing, why should I go and fight?
Because the Austrians and the Germans
and the Serbians are at each other's throats.
I'd rather invest in something else.
So they only bought a third of the bond issue.
And then the astonishing thing that happened,
which really set the tone for the next century
of war, murder, Keynesianism and theft and inflation,
was that the Bank of England went and got two
of the high ranking officials in the Bank of England
to buy the other remaining outstanding two third
of the bonds under their own name
with a line of credit from the Bank of England.
So it wasn't their own money,
but they took money essentially from the Bank of England,
bought two thirds of the bonds that financed the war.
And that was how England was able to keep going into the war.
So that's essentially what they did
is what we today know as quantitative easing.
And back then, they just got,
they printed money from the Bank of England
or credit, printed credit, gave it to those two employees.
They bought the bonds, the government could fight the war.
Sounds like it's a nice idea.
And Keynes, of course, being a huckster himself,
he himself said this was,
he wrote a letter to the Bank of England
that was uncovered recently and he said,
I congratulate you on this masterly manipulation.
I quote it in the book,
masterly manipulation is what he called it,
that they basically managed to buy the bonds
using the money of the government.
And of course, he never had an idea of how economics works
because he never could ask the question of, okay, and then what?
All right, so we just printed money
to buy two thirds of these government bonds.
What's gonna happen next?
What could go wrong?
Not a question Keynes is gonna ask themselves
because their jobs depend on not thinking
about what's going to go wrong.
So just a quick question about war
and somebody's been nonstop reading and thinking
about the wars of the 20th century
and thinking that most of those wars
were unjust, unethical and destructive.
How else do you find, how would you finance a war?
So ideally you don't.
No, but I mean, of course there are sometimes,
you know, you wanna fight for self defense.
Yeah, you finance it, taxation or bonds.
So the people really need to want to war
not just with their voices, their thoughts, their tweets,
with their actual financial investment.
Put up the bullets and the cost of the bullets
and the bodies.
So their life and their financial well being.
That's how it was under the gold standard mostly
because under the gold standard,
the government couldn't print gold.
And so they had a budget and they had a certain amount
of gold and that wasn't just, you know,
that they couldn't infinitely increase it.
So they couldn't tax their population at will
and it's very difficult to take money from people,
you know, go knock on doors and search everybody's homes,
see where they're hiding their gold is very complicated.
On the other hand, when you gave them paper money,
which is what the case was in 1914,
you could take their wealth just by printing the money.
And that's what changed everything
when it comes to war.
That's why the 20th century was the century
of total war because under the gold standard,
governments fought until they ran out of their own gold.
Under the fiat standard with paper money, with credit money,
governments fought until they ran out of liquid wealth
in the hands of all of their citizens.
So let's find flaws in this thinking if there's any.
Okay, there's a lot of pacifist type of thinking
in World War II as Hitler was expanding,
expanding Hitler friend himself as a victim
of the past of history.
He never attacked anybody.
Yeah, everyone's always threatening to attack him.
That's kind of the narrative and he keeps expanding.
He keeps sweet talking with his charisma,
all the countries around him into sort of embracing
pacifism, stay out of the war until the war's
on your doorstep.
So France, just very suboptimal military strategy
from the perspective of many European nations
in response to Hitler.
They were basically hoodwinked by his words.
So then there's Churchill, Winston Churchill,
who stepped up and says, perhaps irrationally,
from some kind of economics perspective,
saying we're not going to back down.
We're going to fight Germany.
And perhaps that step alone is one of the biggest reasons
that Hitler failed in his expansion.
That decision to fight back,
how, what's the right way to do that?
If you're Winston Churchill, what's the right way to do that?
If you're, to fight back evil when violence is required.
Now, you could argue that no war is just,
but there are such a thing as a just war index.
And a lot of people argue, if there is a just war
in the 20th century, it's World War II.
So how would you fund if you were Britain, the war?
Would you require Winston Churchill to convince the populace?
Like don't fight until they're fully convinced
that this is the right thing to do.
You can't just make a decision for them.
You have to convince them fully so that they give their life
and that give their money to support the war.
Is that the right way to do it?
I think so.
And I think when you have a true threat
and a true evil and a true force that people really do think
is genuine, you don't need to convince them.
I mean, when it's real, people will want to fight
and people will want to pay to fight.
And I mean, I think though,
on this particular example, I think, you know,
that the best way to fight Hitler
is to have not fought World War I,
not take out the Kaiser of Germany.
If Britain hadn't, and Britain in the US
had not gotten involved in World War I,
which really is the senseless war about nothing.
Like what was in it?
And what was the goal from anybody fighting that war?
If you look at it, after World War I,
there were very minor adjustments in the borders
of the countries that were participating.
So Germany lost some land, Austria lost some land,
but really it wasn't all that massive.
And it wasn't like, you know,
it wasn't like Britain wanted to take over Germany
and move their people into Germany
and kick the Germans out.
So there was no real value from that war.
And that's why the British people didn't want to take part in it.
And that's why if they hadn't done this
enormously criminal manipulation of printing money
to buy the ponds, Britain wouldn't have gotten into the war.
Germany would still be a kingdom,
and Hitler wouldn't rise.
And yeah, there'd be small changes in the borders
of various European countries.
I struggled to see how it could have been worse.
I mean, I struggled to see who benefited
from four years of carnage in Europe.
And then this came at the height of civilization.
You know, before that, the people of Europe
had the golden era,
the gold standard they were trading with one another.
They traveled and technology was advancing.
And they did not expect this war to last this long.
And, you know, my favorite story from World War I
is the Christmas truce football game,
which I mentioned in my book,
British and German soldiers at the height of the conflict,
they stopped on Christmas Day,
and they played a football game against each other.
I mean, this is not a real war,
where it's a war for survival.
Britain didn't want to end Germany.
Germany didn't want to end Britain.
It was just kings who were emboldened
by the fact that they had a printing press
playing with the lives of the people.
And take that away, take away the printing press,
take away their ability to print money.
I think we'd have had a much, much, much better 20th century.
Yeah, the counterfactual history in Neil Ferguson
is a historian who gets quite a bit of a trouble.
Basically, well, he's a Brit,
suggesting that if Britain stayed out of World War I,
there would be no Hitler, there would be no World War II.
Yep, I agree entirely.
But fiat money.
Yeah, so how fiat money was born, yeah, let's get back to that.
So they financed the war with that money.
So what could go wrong?
That's where we left off.
Well, what could go wrong when you've just printed
an enormous amount of credit and used it to buy bonds?
What goes wrong is that the value of the currency
is going to go down, or in other words,
prices of things are going to go up.
So during the war, prices keep going up,
and this is, of course,
this is going to sound very familiar to victims
of the 20th century.
A government tells you it's because of the war,
it's not our fault, it's because of the Germans,
it's because of the foreigners, it's because of Putin,
it's because of this, it's because of that.
This has always been the case.
War is a very good cover for inflation,
which is caused by monetary phenomena.
So then the war ends,
and inflation, prices have more than doubled
over the past four years,
over the four years of World War I,
prices have more than doubled.
And then the British economy is in bad trouble,
obviously, you know, lost a lot of the labor force
for four years that was out there fighting.
Now those workers come back.
Prices are up, and so people are demanding
that the government control prices,
and the government is trying to fix the problem
of inflation by doing price controls,
which is what they always do, which is catastrophic,
because it makes things worse.
When you implement price controls,
when you say, alright, well,
bread can't be sold for more than X price,
well, that's just preventing bread producers
from producing a lot of bread,
and that's just making the problem worse.
If you let the price rise, the extra price,
first of all, it makes people economize,
so people will only buy what they need,
and it provides the money for the bread producers
to acquire the capital and the resources
they need to produce more bread,
which then brings the price of bread down,
but price controls destroy that.
Then they also implement wage controls,
so you want to also make sure that people have high wages.
So you raise people's wages artificially,
you lower prices artificially,
and you cause an economic problem.
And this is basically, I use this historical example
because it's the birth of Fiat,
because the Bank of England was the most important
monetary system in the world at that time,
and because it's the prototype
that basically the entire planet
copied over the last 100 years.
We've had this same thing happen.
The government prints money because of a stupid reason,
because somebody in power decided
this was worth destroying everybody's livelihood
and savings for,
and then the consequences come in,
and then they start covering up with price controls,
wage controls, and then that makes things worse.
And then they,
and of course, throughout all of that,
they're promising that we're going to go,
oh, and also the other thing that they did,
which I mentioned in the chapter is,
they stopped people from using physical gold,
and they confiscated the,
well, they didn't confiscate it,
but they took the physical gold and they gave people paper.
So I call it the Fiat white paper.
You know, in Bitcoin, we have the white paper.
The Fiat white paper was that
the Bank of England announced
to all of its banks and post offices,
and from now on, you should not make payment in gold,
and you should take payment in gold,
and you should encourage all your customers
to turn in all of their gold and give them paper instead.
Is there an actual document?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Nice.
This is all new stuff.
Obviously, nobody really likes to talk about this stuff
because, you know, they're Fiat economists,
so they don't want to talk about the original sin.
Well, you should like republish it
as the Fiat white paper or something like that.
There's a fascinating book
by a guy called John Osborne.
So in the 1920s,
I think his name was Montagu.
He was the chief of the Bank of England.
He commissioned one of his secretaries,
John Osborne,
to study what the bank did
during World War I,
and it was a study that was kept under wraps,
confidential,
in the Bank of England,
only released in 2017,
almost a century later.
What was special about 2017,
by the way, was a year.
It was a year on which
some of this information was released.
Yeah, a bunch of people got into parts of the basements
of the Bank of England and found this and published it,
and now you can download it as a PDF
and find all of the amazing details.
So they confiscated the gold,
and they forced people to use the paper,
and they promised people that as soon as the war
is going to be over, this is temporary,
we're going to be back to using gold.
And of course, you know,
if you told people in Britain,
this is the real scam about Fiat,
if you told people in Britain in 1914,
hey, we're going to go off the gold standard
because it's better.
I mean, there might have been lynchings
of government officials
because the British pound
at that point had been
the global currency
of the whole world,
and the fact that they'd managed
the Bank of England had kept the British pound
at a fixed rate next to gold
for, since Newton,
you know, the exchange rate,
the value of the British pound
was set by Isaac Newton himself.
He was the warden of the Mint,
and he made the pound
a specific amount of gold,
and since then, up until World War I,
it was
4.25 pounds per ounce of gold,
I think I might be wrong,
but I have it in the book.
So he'd set that price, and it was a matter of national pride
for people in England, you know.
The sterling is as good as gold
because for two centuries it had been stuck to gold.
There was the exception of the Napoleonic Wars,
but for two centuries mostly it was stuck to that.
And so they went off that,
and then they couldn't go back
because they wanted to go back,
they didn't have enough gold,
they didn't have access to finance the war,
and they had printed a whole bunch of money
that was out there.
So this begins the problem
for England, and that begins the end
of England as the world's superpower.
And the way they tried to fight that
was to get more and more countries around the world
to establish central banks,
and have unhauled British pounds.
So if they'd hold, you know,
basically dumping their bags,
like just any other shit coin,
if you get people to buy your shit coin,
that raises the value of your shit coin.
Can you define shit coin?
Shit coin is, in my definition
of a shit coin is that it's any form of money
where somebody can produce it.
So soft money?
Not necessarily, I guess.
I think the difference,
so there's easy money,
but the shit coin
is something that someone can produce
at a rate that is different,
at a cost that is different from the market cost.
So gold, nobody can make gold
except that they dig for it,
and the cost of mining gold
is generally in the range of the price of gold.
Seems true for bitcoin.
So gold is not a shit coin?
Gold is not a shit coin.
The copper is.
I'm not so sure.
I wouldn't call copper a shit coin
as much as it is easy money,
but I think government currencies
and other alt coins, I think are shit coins,
because somebody could click a button
and make 10 times the supply.
I think that this began
with the
will for war in World War I.
So the march towards fiat
began
with a global desire
for war
in the 20th century.
Did war start this, or was war a result?
It's difficult to say really.
I think it goes both ways.
I think
you can't have permanent war
without fiat,
and I also think
there's a case to be made that you can't really have
fiat without war.
So it's some kind of weird
dynamical system with a chicken and egg
situation, and they build it on top of each other,
and there's a few individuals that
figured out there's a way to manipulate this
to play this kind of game, and it escalates,
and nothing gives you the
ability to manipulate money
quite like war.
When you have a war,
you can declare an emergency,
you can call all the people who oppose you
traitors,
you can
get people to support you not because
what you're doing is good, but because
you play on their sense of tribalism.
In your book, you do cost benefit analysis.
So you do acknowledge
or think about the pros
of fiat currency.
Can you
do just that?
What do you do with it and look at the cost
just broadly at the highest level?
So the way that I write the fiat standard
is that I try and
analyze it as an engineering system in the same
way that I wrote the Bitcoin standard.
So with the Bitcoin standard, I looked at Bitcoin
from first principles and tried to explain
how it works for a reader that doesn't
really have much of a background in
computer science, networks,
or economics.
And I thought I'll do the same with the fiat.
Let's just ignore the official stories
and see if anything actually works.
And
I think it does have value
in the fact that it,
you know, the reason that it was,
that they were able to pull it off
is because it was not possible
for people who don't
want to be part of it
to use gold independently of governments.
This is really the key thing.
Gold is just very expensive to move around
and
the fact that it is expensive to move around
is that
there's
inevitably going to emerge institutions
where it is centralized in physical
location. And then
these institutions trade liabilities
for the gold. So really
the gold standard
intrinsically
must involve
credit as becoming part of the monetary
system. It has to be the credit
and because it gets centralized can easily
be captured by the government.
To be fair
the benefit of the fiat system is that it
saves us on the cost of moving gold around
which is pretty significant.
Generally, you know, moving a bar of gold
across the Atlantic is going to cost
somewhere between 0.1 to 1%
of the cost of the gold bar.
So you move it 100 times
back and forth between the Atlantic,
you need to pay the whole gold bar.
The cost of the whole gold bar to move it 100 times
across. Well, with fiat money
with essentially government credit
it's just sending a message
from one's central bank to another
and you can move it halfway around
the world. Is there also something to be said
about the cost in time?
So you're saving the sort of, you're reducing the friction
with the communication as well
of the transactions as well.
Exactly, it's faster.
How big is that benefit?
Because wouldn't you argue that that
potential is the thing that enables modern
economy both the speed
and the low cost. So increasing the scale
and the frequency
of the speed of the transactions.
Yeah, arguably it does help
in that regard. However
it isn't as if you couldn't have
fast transactions built on top of
gold. So you could have gold being used
for final settlement and you could
have bank
settling with one another essentially
using credit settlement. Can you define settlement
just for people
who are outside of this world? Because we'll mention
that word quite a bit probably. Good question.
So the way that it works is, let's say
right now I'm going to pay you
$10 over
PayPal or credit card.
So it shows up in your PayPal or credit card
within a few seconds that I've
sent you the money and then that's yours.
But
it didn't also happen
in those 10 seconds that my bank
which could be in another country
sent the money to your bank
into your account.
There's a lot of infrastructure
making that. So what actually happened
is that I have an account with my bank
and you have an account with your bank
and when the message is communicated from
my app to yours,
my bank crosses out the money and
your bank credits you with the money
and then at the end of the day,
week or month
banks in the same city will settle with
one another, banks in the same country
will settle with one another and banks
from different countries
will settle with one another. So they won't
move the $10 from my account to yours
at the end of the day or week
or month. They'll
tally all of the money that was sent from
one bank to the other and then just
settle the difference. So it turns out
at the end of the month my bank had sent
$15 million to your bank
and your bank had sent $14 million to
my bank. So they
give them $1 million and that settles it.
That finalizes the transaction.
So final settlement
3D is like the, you can think about it
as the infrastructure of the system
and then you can think of these
things as being the higher
layer levels and you had a wonderful
discussion about that with Michael
Saylor. So the final settlement is
the moment when
you paper and ideas
connect to physical reality
or to some
representation of physical reality. Yeah and
under gold, everything was
tethered to physical reality because there was
a market commodity at the bottom of all of this
and nobody could print that market commodity
and so at the end of the month, if your
bank made too many payments, if
you made too many payments, there was
a reckoning. There were, you know, if you were
reckless, if you were insolvent
you went out of business.
So there was no
there was no way to fool that. But then
we moved to the fiat century and
everything is credit. At the end of
the day, the final layer
is government credit and so
as long as your friends with the government
basically you never go bankrupt.
So all kinds of
hucksters managed to find their way into
you know getting into
position where they don't get bankrupt.
So in part two of the fiat standard
called fiat life
you describe the effects of fiat money
and a bunch of things like life
food, science, education
what is the most pernicious effect
of fiat money on our world
on our life. So taking a
step outside of the monetary system
actually like how that affects our life
from this book. There's
a whole bunch of things and I won't
be able to go over them and I highly recommend reading
the book. But if I were to pick one
I would say it's the impact that it has on our time
preference on our
valuation of the future. So
remember when we started the discussion I said
the key function
of money is that it serves as a store
of value and the harder the money is
the better it is at
providing us with a way for
providing for our future.
And so the harder the money is the less
we discount the future. We always discount the future
compared to the present. So if I told you
I'm going to give you something today
versus giving it to you 10 years from now
the same thing you would prefer to take
it now because then you'd get to enjoy it over the next
10 years. So we always prefer
the present to the future
there's always a discount on the future
and that discount is called time preference
the degree to which we prefer
the present to the future is called our time preference.
So the higher
our time preference
the less we care about the future
and the process of civilization is the process
of lowering our time preference
where we start caring more for the future
we start prioritizing
the present less and less so we start
being able to not consume
everything that we have and store it
and so money is essential for that
and under the gold standard
everyone in the world had the ability
to provide for their future
by simply using the same money that they use
you would work a day and you would get paid
in a gold coin and you could take that
gold coin and keep it safe
for 10 years and know
that at the end of those 10 years that
gold coin would buy you slightly
more than what it bought you the day that you
earned it. So anybody could
provide for their future and anybody
could have very high degree of certainty
that whatever
their saving is going to be there
and they want it in the future
because the money supply was only increasing
at 1.5% whereas
the production of goods
and services was increasing for most
cases
for most periods at a higher rate than that
so you could buy more apples and oranges
and houses and cars at the
end of the 10 years than you could
at the beginning of the 10 years so everybody had
a way of providing for the future and
with that people lower their time preference
and that is reflected across
all aspects of life
I think it's not just an economic thing
you see it in the savings rate you know the ability
to deny yourself gratification today
I could take the money that I have
and throw a giant party
buy a sports car buy a yacht
and yet you decide
I'm not going to do that I'm going to keep it so that tomorrow
I can throw a bigger party
or buy a better yacht or
have a better life or give my children
a better life. So
all of human civilization really is the process
of us lowering our time preference
and finding harder
monies that allow us to provide better for the future
is how we
really technologically we do that
I think of the
hardness of money as being the control knob
for our time preference
and you can see this reflected
in the 20th century where we go from
the money supply increases at around
one and a half percent under gold
to this current situation where
over the last 60 years I ran the numbers
on money supply and fiat
the global fiat supply has increased
at around 14% per year so
we've done a 10x in the increase
in the supply of money
annually and 14%
is a weighted average so
if you take a basic numerical average
for all fiat currencies you get something
like 30% the average
fiat currency increases by 30%
but if you value it by
the volume of each currency so that
you know you're not giving equal weight
to the Venezuelan bolivar
increasing at 500%
a year and the dollar increasing at 8%
a year
if you do it by value of the currencies
so that you get the total supply of fiat
it's something like 14%
unweighted is 30% you said
I'd like to see the worst ones
the people that
track that average up
but 14% is still
an incredibly high high number
and so you're saying that
over the century
over the past 60 years 1960 to 2020
we get World Bank data on that
pretty reliable data on World Bank
and European Union OECD data
I ran the numbers on that
weighted average something like 14%
and what effect that has
on time preference?
the effect is now it's much much much harder
for everybody to provide for their future
everywhere in the world it's much harder
so how do I
get the equivalent of the old gold coin
that I could just put under my mattress
and expect it to be there 10 years from now
while gold itself isn't cutting it
gold can't keep up with inflation
and the reason for that is that gold is not being used
as a money anymore in that
you can't
send it
internationally you can't use it to
settle trade internationally
which therefore means demand for it
monetarily is limited and so
it's becoming more and more
an industrial metal
as a result of the fact that
its value doesn't keep up with inflation
it becomes economical to use it in industry
so we're seeing gold become like silver
in that it gets used in industry
so the stockpile declines
so the stock to flow ratio declines as well
and it becomes more and more of an industrial metal
and it can't
protect your wealth over time very well
so what do you do? well you could
invest and this is kind of
the obvious answer that Keynesian will give you is
well you just put your money in an investment
but investment is different from saving
saving the whole point of saving
is that the thing is liquid and that the thing
carries little uncertainty you know
you just held the gold coin
and it just sat there it did nothing
it didn't take risk you knew
that it was going to be there in 10 years investment means
you give the gold coin to somebody
to go and do something with it
and it could work it could not work
if it works you get a positive return
you get more gold back if it
fails you might not get any of your gold back
so taking on risk
is something very different from saving
saving is just a way of buying the future
investing is taking on
a risk and you could
lose everything with it so
what ends up happening and this is
the Keynesian objection I think is
very
wrong and bad because
investment
is a job in itself to
figure out what to do with your money in order to
beat inflation
is something that you know
there are professionals out there on Wall Street
that have PhDs in finance that have enormous
computers and
they have enormous staffs of
PhDs and master's degrees and math nerds
that are crunching numbers and figuring out
how to allocate your portfolio
so that you can beat inflation and guess what
the majority of them don't beat inflation
the majority of them can't beat inflation
not as measured by CPI
which is completely fraudulent but
if you remember 14%
or even you know the 7%
like if you look at just the increase in the
money supply which I think is a much better metric
and this is what's reflected on the
desirable goods like if you look at the price
of real estate in Miami Beach
as Michael Saylor mentioned in your example
it goes up at around 6% 7% per year
on average over the last century
so that's you know if you want
to live in a nice area that's what
happening to real estate if you want to go to the good universities
that's what's going up it's going up at a rate
that's similar to the increase in the money supply
and you can beat CPI
but you know CPI
is designed so you can beat it
but you can't really beat the appreciation
in the things that you actually want to buy
in the price of good food the price of good real estate
so
and you know most investment professionals
fail at doing that so what hope
does a doctor
or an engineer or a scientist
or an athlete have in doing those things
investment is hard and saving
should be easy exactly
saving is essential
for us as a civilization
and what Fiat did is it took that away
from us and then it forced everybody
to become an investor
or more accurately a gambler because
you're not just even because the money
itself is broken because the money itself
is constantly changing in value
investing is becoming more of a crapshoot
I mean value investing is
completely underperforming
compared to market analysis
you know you listen to the Fed
and you
what matters to the price of individual
companies is monetary policy much more
than it is their own performance so
basically you need to be a junkie watching the Fed
and following all of the world's central banks
and you need to learn macroeconomics and you need to learn
what all the central banks are doing
and you need to understand how commodity markets
work and you need to understand how equity markets
work and bond markets and real estate markets
you need to do all of those things
just in order to be able to save
and earn the
and keep the money that you've already earned
that's the criminal thing about it
like I've already earned that money
being a doctor being a dentist
being an athlete being an engineer I built a house
for somebody and I got that money
and all I want to do is just make sure that I can
have it 10 years from now
the only way to do so is to become a crappy
engineer because you have to spend half your
time not doing engineering
instead spend half of that time
learning about Japanese central bank
monetary policy and commodity markets
and what's going to happen to copper
and what's going to happen to oil and
what's happening in the wars
and what's happening with foreign policy
and Russia and the US
and all of those things
under the
gold standard you didn't care about any of that stuff
your gold coin worked regardless of all of those
things so what this means is
the future so first of all you know we have
all of the problems I mentioned but also
it means that the future
becomes much more uncertain so
you're far less likely to provide for yourself
10 years from now far less likely to
find an easy way to give yourself
value 10 years from now
and so you become more short termist
and that is reflected economically
in a lower savings rate and we see savings
rates decline but it is also
reflected in all manners of decision making
and I think if you really want to see
what it is take a look at
a society that goes through hyperinflation
and look at what happens there
how do people
change under hyperinflation
and compare that to
essentially what we see in the 20th
century all over under
not hyperinflation but under low inflation
10, 15%
that you see across the board most of the time
is just slow motion
hyperinflation so what happens in hyperinflation
everybody gets their paychecks
they run straight to the supermarket
they spend all of their money
nobody thinks about savings
nobody thinks about the future
survival until the end of this month
is highly uncertain
how likely are you to be planning for what
you are going to be doing 5 years from now
very unlikely
but also it is
reflected not just economically
it is also reflected in all aspects of morality
all the way in which we deal with each other
as human beings when
your survival is precarious
how much are you invested in the notion
of being a good citizen
about your reputation
on caring about not getting caught in a crime
all of these things become harder
to value
so people start committing crime
people start caring less and less about the future
and we see it reflected in everything
and I argue you see it reflected in architecture
we used to build houses in the 19th century
that last until today
and then in the 20th century we build
essentially disposable cardboard boxes
that get scrapped in 20 years
so what can you say about
the potential positive effects
of lower time preferences
so it is a balance
basically
you are talking about an average kind of time preference
but there are some things in life
where low time preference
can be a negative thing
so if I want to take on risk
not for investment
but say I want to start a business
I want to take
something crazy take a leap into the unknown
be an entrepreneur
what can you say about that kind of leap
taking on debt
what is the value of that
within the current system
what is the right approach to that
within the current system what is the right approach overall
from an economics perspective
so it is not saving for the future
it is
doing something while
taking the money from your mattress
taking on debt
and having a dream in your heart
that you somehow just want to do
a decision but it is something
as being human
it is taking a leap into the unknown
because something in your heart says to do it
I think you are more likely to be taking the leap in the unknown
when you have a little bit of gold
in the mattress than when you don't
I think this is the thing
if you look at the late 19th century
and I discussed this in the Bitcoin standard
that was arguably the most innovative
period in human history
there is qualitative evidence
look at the world around you today
pretty much everything that we use
was invented in that period
the car, the airplane
the telegraph
the telephone
the camera
pretty much modern life as
late 19th century
the period between 1870 and 1914
because the whole world was practically
on a gold standard
the whole world was using the same money
and the whole world could save in the same currency
that meant
two bicycle shop owning brothers
in North Carolina
could go and try and fly
even as all the scientific experts in 1903
were
confirming that
the possibility of flight has been
debunked as unscientific
Lord Kelvin said
not in a million years we are going to be flying
Thomas Edison said it is never going to happen
no I think it was Edison who said a million years
but Kelvin also said it is never going to happen
The New York Times said it is never going to happen
the same month in which
the Wright brothers did it
and they continued to deny that it was going to happen
even two years after they did it
but
why could they do that?
because they had savings in gold
they had the security with something that you know
is going to be there
and then you can take a risk with the stuff
that is extra you know
I have say three years expenditures
in gold under my mattress
and I know that I could take a risk
with everything else because whatever
bad things happen with all of my dreams
like even you know flying
think about how insane that is
I still can go back to the three years of
gold that I have saved
still okay to take on debt
given the stuff the gold under the mattress
well this is the thing under the gold standard
the way that people finance things was predominantly
with capital with equity
because you had gold savings
I had gold savings everybody had gold savings
when you wanted to start the business
you could use your own savings or somebody else's savings
so you didn't need to
get into debt
well you could get equity from others
and you could also get debt from others
but it's directly mapped
to physical reality
it's directly mapped to economic reality
and that there's a hard money out there
that you know what you're spending money
you want to build your airplane factory
you need to get actual resources
so you get actual gold either yours or somebody else's
you borrow it or you give them equity
but there's real resources
now what happened with the fiat system
and this is the first part of the book
where I look at it from an engineering kind of perspective
is essentially
and I think this is like the breakthrough inside of the book
what fiat does
is that it replaces gold mining
with credit creation
the way that we make fiat money
the way that fiat is
mined into existence
is through credit creation
most people think of fiat money as being something that happens when government prints money
and we still use the term government's printing money
but the vast majority of fiat
is not physical
and in fact fiat is not created when it is printed
physically
it's created when it is lent
so when you go to a bank
to get a $1 million loan to buy a house
that bank is not going to give you a million dollars
from their own money or from their depositors money
they're going to make a fresh new million dollars
when you walk out of that bank
the money supply has increased
by $1 million to finance your home
so
what fiat does
is it was basically
born out of government credit
and the credit of banks that are backed
by the central bank and the government
so if you're part of
the institutions that are allowed
fiat privilege where you can just issue
loans backed by the central bank
backed by the currency
you are effectively creating new currency
new money every time you issue the loan
that's fiat mining is credit creation
i love it
can you say something
you can't really have credit without a demand for credit
you can't really have an increase in supply
without a demand for it
is there any value you place
in the humans wanting it
basically
people wanting to do something with that credit
wanting to take big leaps
big risks big entrepreneurial decisions
so
is it all bad is all credit bad
no i think
what's bad is
anything in my opinion
anything that is consensual
i want to borrow money from you and we agree the terms
i can't object to that
as long as you and i both agree
but in the case of the fiat
system it's not just you and the bank
who come to an agreement
everybody who uses the currency
is forced to be part of that agreement
because if you default
effectively what's protecting the bank
is the fact that the government can just print
a bunch of money and make the bank hold
so effectively
that's interesting so that
little agreement between
the bank and you is
actually an agreement between the bank you
and the entire populace that's using the currency
exactly they're forced to provide
the safety net for you and me to go and make
that loan and that safety net
is the devaluation of the currency
that's how it
the whole thing actually works
so this is why you know
i wrote the bitcoin standard explaining bitcoin
and basically the takeaway message of the bitcoin standard
is you need to stack as much bitcoin as you can
because this is the best money that has ever been invented
and we'll talk about that
why bitcoin is the hardest money
but with fiat
the conclusion of the fiat standard
again this is not financial advice
i'm a lowly academic
you shouldn't listen to me on issues of money
but i think theoretically and intellectually
the conclusion of the fiat system
is to be short fiat as much as you can
that's the smart winning move
so human wisdom
over thousands of years is to save
try and not borrow as much as you can
try and accumulate as much savings as you can
that's reversed under fiat
if you're saving money
you're just subsidizing everybody else taking on loans
if you're taking on loans
you're benefiting from all the people that are
borrowing so the winning move
under the fiat system and this is what rich people do
is you borrow
under the fiat monetary system
they don't hold assets
if you're worth a billion dollars today
you don't have a billion dollars in a checking account
you've got maybe
a hundred thousand, a million
five million
or something like that
a tiny fraction of your money is held in cash
the majority is going to be held
in all kinds of other hard assets
and you're going to be borrowing
the richest people in the world are the biggest borrowers
in the world
and that's how they are the richest
and the most powerful because
every time you're borrowing
you're giving the bank an excuse
to print new money
so you're devaluing everybody else's money
and you're getting a bit of the cut
if you're going to buy a house
with your savings
you're accumulating the savings and they're losing value
and
if I were to go to buy
the same house with credit
I'm getting the bank to print
money for me so obviously
they can cut me in on that deal
and that's why it's much cheaper for everybody to buy with credit
that's why everybody buys everything
on credit
so when we look at the global monetary system
the thing you want to do as a government
is be the sexiest currency
out there
so the
the main currency like the dollar currently
is the one that has the most power
in that kind of context
so you have if you were
to try to summarize what is the global monetary system
as it is today
is a bunch of fiat currencies
battling
for position
for use
outside their nation
and so doing
trying to gain power in the geopolitical sense
is that if we just zoom out
what is the global monetary system
like what is it currently
so outside the United States
the whole thing
you could say that but I think it's more realistic
looking at how it has actually evolved over the past few decades
it's really a dollar system
it's not a system of currencies
vying with one another
it's a dollar system and all other currencies are just
basically I like to call them dollar
plus country risk
so
it always returns home to the dollar
yeah there is no competition
there is no second best as Michael Saylor would say
and money is like that
you know gold was a winner take all
by the end of the 19th century
the global monetary market is effectively
a winner take all for the dollar
and
if we get it to bitcoin you'll know
I also think digital currencies
are also going to be a winner take all situation
so
money wants to be won in fact there is no such thing
as multiple currencies multiple currencies
is just a step back to barter
money is
one if you go back to a system of several currencies
you're just reinventing barter
so
in the case of the dollar system
the global dollar system is built around
the dollar
because all central banks have dollar
reserves and because all central banks
use the dollar's clearing mechanisms
so that's why you're basically
playing in the dollar system
this seems to have changed over the last couple
of months with the
sanctions on Russia and the confiscation of
Russian reserves it remains
to be seen what that's going
to do and how that's going to change
but
it is looking like
this dollar system is clearly
unsustainable it's not sustainable for the US
it's not sustainable for anybody
speaking of which so you
do an amazing
podcast called the bitcoin standard podcast
so episode 108
of that podcast is about
the very thing you just mentioned
and allow me please to read the description of that
and then ask you a couple questions about your thoughts
in general
the description reads
after the Russian invasion of Ukraine
the US confiscated the Russian central banks
significant monetary reserves
and banned some Russian banks from the swift network
serious questions are being asked
about the survival of the post war
dollar based world
monetary order
will Russia, China and other countries
actually build an alternative international settlement
system after years of threatening
to do so
will global central banks stop accumulating
US treasury bonds
and replace them with gold and commodities
will we witness the birth
of a new commodity of gold based monetary order
in this seminar
we use the insights from the bitcoin standard
and the fiat standard
on temporal and spatial salability
to explain why reports
of the death of the dollar and the emergence
of a new gold standard may be exaggerated
so I would love to get your analysis
on this situation
what are the fundamentals of it
what is swift, what are the possible future
evolutions of the global monetary system
yeah so swift is the network that the US
Federal Reserve uses
for moving money around
the world
so basically the US government can sanction you
off of swift as they've done with
Russian banks, as they've done with Iran
and as they've done with Afghanistan
so
effectively, I mean this is really the
catastrophe of the current monetary system
in order to be able to trade
as a member, as a citizen
of your country, you need your monopoly
local central bank
to be on good terms with the US government
so that they would let them operate it
and this is really like
on top of the
aspect of the hardness of money, this is the other
really powerful thing about bitcoin
which is that it's just purely a technological thing
it doesn't matter
if you're Russian, if you're Iranian, if you're American
if you're Chinese, it's a technology
so it's like a spoon or a knife
or a car, you know
you operate it properly and it works
so with bitcoin it's the same thing, it doesn't care about
your passport, if you have the private key
you click send and the money
goes, well it doesn't really
go, but effectively it does
go anywhere at once and
the money can move without having
to abide by political situations
and the point here is not to bash
US foreign policy much
as that might be deserved, I'm just going to discuss
it from a kind of technical
perspective, it has to be a political system
with fiat because ultimately it relies
on credit and then the government
is the one that has the guns and the government is going
to decide who gets to pay their loans
anyway and the government's
going to have to
make its own rules about
who gets to play and who doesn't and so
it has to be political as this kind
of fiat system
and
when I wrote the bitcoin standard
initially I used to be much more of a gold
bug and in my mind
gold bugs have spent the last 50 years
saying the global monetary system
is going to collapse next week and we're going to go back to
a gold standard and writing
the fiat standard
gave me a very good appreciation for why this
hasn't happened and why it's not
very likely to happen and I think
the reason is, as I said earlier
gold is very expensive to move around
and perhaps more importantly
is very expensive to verify, that's
really the problem with it, it's very expensive
to verify that the gold that you're receiving
is original gold so the only
way to do this properly
is to melt the gold bars down
and recast them which is pretty
expensive so
we have this situation now where Russia
which is one of the biggest economies in the world
has been kicked off
to varying degrees off of the global
monetary system and the US has confiscated
their reserves and I don't
have political opinions about the war
it's not something I'm very familiar with
it's outside of my area of expertise
I'm just analyzing the monetary aspects of it
it is on the one hand
whether you think the war
is justified or the sanctions are justified
is not something I can opine on
but
the implication of this is that
effectively the US might be shooting itself
in the foot because it's telling everybody
in the world, your money
in our system is not really your money
it's just a token to play
in our arcade
at any point in time if you misbehave we kick you
out of the arcade and we take your tokens
and so
I mean this is something that
China, Russia, Iran and many countries
have made a lot of noise about over the past decades
it got
real this year
but it's been decades
of China, Iran and
Russia to some extent saying
that you know we want to build an alternative to the
US dollar based system
and yet they haven't
and I think there's very good reasons they haven't
and the reason is what do you do it based on
how do you build it so you can do
a credit based system based on
but then who's going to be the big boss
is it going to be China, is it going to be Russia
is it going to be Iran, is it going to be India
none of these countries wants to be
they don't want to jump out of
the US based system
to get into somebody else's based system
so China doesn't want to use a Russian system
Russia doesn't want to use a Chinese system
and so therefore you can't use their own
central banks currencies
don't you think they have enough leverage
India, China
Russia combined
with several other nations have enough leverage
and incentive to create
their own system
so any one player yes but if they collaborate
yeah but then okay
so what are you based on like
who's going to be the boss
who's going to be the one who can in this case China
right
China is becoming increasingly an economic
power in the world yeah that's
hard to deny yes it's true
and it's the most likely scenario perhaps
if we were to witness something like
this is going to be a Chinese
based system so is it possible to have
like a split
in
what is the driving currency of the world
it's possible but I don't think it's
sustainable again money wants to be one
and that's the kind of thing that I argue in that seminar
so we could see this emerge based
around the Yuan and
you know likely I mean
Russia is obviously going to hurt economically
from what happened from the confiscation of
the reserves and from the sanctions so
it's not going to be in a position
and of course because it's outside of the US
based system it's not in
the strongest negotiating position with the Chinese
so the Chinese might be able to
get them to join their Yuan based system
but I don't think that's sustainable in the
long run because
these governments can issue
their laws and make their
designs and then make their monetary
systems but ultimately
there's
there are billions of Chinese people and
billions of dollar based people and they're going
to want to trade with one another and the power
to want to trade with one another is too strong
we can't just split the world economy into
two monetary systems that don't trade with one
another so then they're going to want to trade with one another
or the dark
possibility
is it
the inability to trade
as opposed to
being a forcing function for trade
it will become a forcing function
for conflict in cyberspace
and potentially hot war
yes this is the scary part of it
and this is basically how World War II happened
you know because
there's an old historian who used to say
when I think his name is Auto Mallory
and I quote him in the Bitcoin Standard
if goods don't cross borders then bombs will
if people trade with one another
they have an incentive for each other's well being
and then
they have less of an incentive to fight
and it was the death of global trade
in the 1930s because of the
failure of the fiat system
that brought about the rise
of the populism and the
rise of all those leaders that hated each other and helped
finance the war and bring it about
so that is the scary possibility
and of course you can't discount that
with all of the escalation that you see
that is a possibility that it could turn into
a real war but then
even so
I think ultimately you can't fight wars forever
that there's going to
it's going to end at some point and we're going to be back
at square one or well not
square one we're going to be back at the same dilemma
of who's going to have the global
monetary system and
so one alternative is that what the Chinese
and the Russians could do is they could
base it on a commodity
so a lot of people are now saying well they're going to base it on
copper and
corn and agricultural commodities
and that's
the analysis of saleability that
we discuss in the Bitcoin standard and the fiat standard
I don't think that's workable
if you end up basing the monetary system on copper
as we said earlier
doesn't matter how many governments say that we're going to
make a new monetary system based on
copper, grains
and nickel and
iron and so on
doesn't matter you're just going to stockpile
you're going to have to stockpile those things in order to
make a market in them
and then if you stockpile those things you're just
raising their value inviting the producers
to make more flood the market
I hope they don't try this because it's going to be
a devastating
impact on
the world economy you're going to have
central banks bidding up the price of essential commodities
that people need for real uses
in order to back their currencies with them
and then just incentivizing the
producers to make more and more and more of it
and then bringing the price back down so it's going to be
a very expensive mistake where we
raise the price of copper destroy a lot of
industries dependent on copper and it's not just copper
but also food and then increase the supply
beyond what we need and
the end result is copper miners make out well
governments go broke
and we end up
with a lot of rusting copper
in government
warehouses that's why I don't think it works
for the
to use commodities that are not
monetary commodities
then the question is maybe gold
can we go back on another gold standard
and I mean
Russia seems to have done that
I'm not so sure it's very difficult to get
reliable information I'm trying to look into this
more
but they seem to have said that they're
they're fixing the price of gold
in rubles so they will buy and sell
gold at a fixed rubble
rate which effectively means you're on a gold standard
now I'm not sure how
much how serious this
is how they've managed to stick to it
but it seems to have stabilized
the rubble and in fact brought it back to its pre
war level which I found absolutely
astonishing you know considering all the sanctions
going on but
in the short run
it's obviously much better than having your currency
pegged to nothing but in the long run
I also don't think gold
is going to cut it in the 21st century
do you think there's any chance
they go full gangster move
and
go into the digital space on the blockchain
and go with bitcoin
I think you know the point
of this discussion is that you know we run through
all these other options you know a Chinese
based system why it probably won't work
a commodity based system why it won't work
and a gold based system why
won't work I think they might have to
learn this the wrong way I mean
the hard way but eventually
I don't see them doing it now but eventually
I think
the winning move is going to be to go on a bitcoin based
monetary system well I don't know
if everything is always has to be the hard way
I'd love it
not to be but I mean it's
it doesn't look like there is
any kind of desire in China
or in Russia to switch to a bitcoin based
to take a leap to bitcoin
so unfortunately I think
we're going to go through a few
years maybe many years
of learning the lesson the hard way
of trying to accumulate these commodities
and seeing the limitations that make them
unsuitable as money today
one of the things I'm really concerned about
is the tension the amount
the increasing
amount of hate in the world yes
and the increasing amount
of power centers
in the world
between which
hate
is
making a regular appearance
and because the weapons of war becoming
more and more powerful as they have been in the past
many decades I'm really
concerned about nuclear war
so let us see if bitcoin can fix this
yes bitcoin fixes
all of this
first rule of bitcoin is
if it's a problem bitcoin fixes it
alright well I have some
personal questions for bitcoin then because I have some
my life is pretty fucked up
so I'll have to try to see
a quick pause for bathroom breaking
let's return to the basics
what is bitcoin
we started with what is money
what is bitcoin we talked about hard money
inflation
fiat
the history of money
the history of war in the 20th century
and that takes us into the 21st century
what is bitcoin
bitcoin is a software
and it's a distributed software
to operate peer to peer network between
members who are all equal
they're all peers
and what this software does is that it allows
you to operate a payment network
between those peers
and that payment network has its own currency
and
that seems like
just a simple software game
but the reason this is such a big deal is
I believe bitcoin is the most advanced
form of money ever invented
and the reason for that comes from two
properties that this network has
the first one
is that the currency is the hardest money
ever invented
is the money whose supply is the most
resistant to inflation
it's the first monetary asset that we've
ever invented that is guaranteed
to be fixed in its supply
that cannot be increased beyond a certain
number so there's only ever going to be 21
million bitcoins and that's
a qualitative leap forward
in our technologies of money
all of our monies leak
essentially because people can always
make more and more and more of them
the best money is the one that leaks the least
which is gold because it only
leaks one and a half percent in other words
your share of the gold
stock is
diluted by one and a half percent every year
ideally you'd like it to be
zero bitcoin is currently at around
1.8%
headed towards zero so it's the first money
that we've ever had that goes to zero
in terms of terminal supply so
there will never be more than 21 million bitcoin
I think that's a huge deal because you know
as I said earlier
money is always whatever is the hardest to make
and now bitcoin is the hardest thing to
make and then the second property
which is extremely important as well
is the fact that it operates
without the need to
trust in anybody it doesn't have a
party that is in charge of it it doesn't
have a central authority that can
you know it's as I said it's peer to
peer so there's it only has users
it doesn't have any admins
there's no authority in charge of
bitcoin that can take your bitcoin that can stop
you from using bitcoin that
can change the rules of bitcoin they can't make more
of it so it's fixed
it's available for anybody in the world
it's the hardest money ever invented
and it is absolutely
I think
an enormously
enormously significant invention because
if you read the fiat standard
and the bitcoin standard as well
you'll see my perspective for why I think
a very large number of problems
on the world are in the world
are caused by easy money are caused
by inflation
and caused by
government having access to essentially an infinite
a recourse to
people's wealth and I think
bitcoin fixes this because it
allows us to have
money that has the
salability of gold across time
meaning it holds its value across time
like gold but much better than gold
but also it has
it is similar to fiat and that fiat
can travel quickly but bitcoin can
travel even faster than fiat so
it combines
gold's salability
across time with fiat's salability
across space in one
immutable package that nobody can change
and nobody can control
Can you define the word salability?
Salability is the essential property
of money it's the ability
of a good to be sold
easily on the market
specifically to be sold without much loss
in its value so houses are
great for living in but they're not very
salable you know if you want to sell a house
you can just click a button and sell a house
and have a giant market of people
buying houses from you you need to
find
you need to find somebody who wants the exact house that you
have with the exact specifications that you have
and because you know houses are not identical
there's no liquid giant market for people
to just buy and sell identical
houses from
so gold for instance has
good salability as
money because it's a liquid
good it's uniform and people
are always buying it fiat
dollars have great salability because
everybody's always buying an exchanging
dollar for other goods so if you have
a hundred dollar bill you can easily
get rid of it and you'll get a hundred
dollars worth of stuff for it if you have
a hundred dollars worth of
stuff it's harder to get rid of it if you have
a hundred dollars worth of phone
it's not as easy to spend it as a hundred
dollar bill that's salability
what do you mean that
bitcoin I understand that
bitcoin has the salability of gold across time
better even yeah
better yes like on the order whatever
and then
has the salability of fiat across
space what does that mean so if you remember
when you asked me what is the advantage of fiat
what is the advantage it offers us
it's cheaper to move fiat across
space than it is to move gold
with a current fiat monetary
system for all of its flaws
you can send money
I could send money from my bank account
in the US to a bank account
in China
in a couple of days or in Britain
in France in a day or two
which is much faster than you could
do with gold and much cheaper than you could do with gold
but
in reality with fiat
the reason bitcoin improves on that is that
with bitcoin you're actually selling
you're sending final settlement in a couple of hours
so you send the bitcoin transaction
you get 6 confirmations in an hour
you get about 12 confirmations in 2 hours
on average
with 12 confirmations you know you're pretty
definitely
clearly safe on this
so within a couple of hours
you could send a billion dollars across the ocean
and
have final settlement on them
it's not just that you've sent a credit obligation
that's going to need weeks and months to settle
which is the case with fiat
so it is
faster than fiat effectively
so it's harder than gold and faster than fiat
that's a good way of putting it
one other aspect of bitcoin
I have to ask
to me on the human level it's fascinating
is it was founded
by Satoshi Nakamoto
an anonymous founder there's no leader
so that's another aspect of the decentralization
it's leaderless
so unfortunately it's not a monarchy
fortunately
or fortunately yes
who is Satoshi Nakamoto do you think
and first of all is it you
it definitely is not me
I don't know who it is
if it was would you tell me
it's a trick question
I know it's a trick question but I mean
everybody who knows me knows I can't read the code
so you would say that
even if you could
do you think it's one person
do you think it's multiple people
is it interesting to you do you think it's fundamental
to the coin itself
to not the coin the
the entirety of the concept
that its founder is anonymous
and how much guts do you think it takes
if it's one person to just walk away
from so much money
I've considered all these questions many times
it's very hard to formulate
a definitive answer to all of them
I don't know who it is
I don't know
why he or them
or she are not
spending the coins that they most
likely have
I think what really matters
in Bitcoin about Satoshi is the fact that he's not there
and this is what's truly
astonishing about it the fact
the most important fact in Bitcoin is the fact that
the creators disappeared and the thing
has continued to operate now for almost 12 years
without him being there or 11 years
I think it's been since he's left
and this is really the most
important thing and
maybe he died or she died
or they got into
an accident on a road trip
or whatever and that's why they haven't accessed
their coins maybe they are incapacitated
for some reason
but whatever reason it is
I really think
it's fate or serendipity
that is
giving us this very vital
very very very vital
building ingredient in Bitcoin which
no other digital currency would ever
recreate which is that
because it was the first
it was the one that was able to
establish the first mover advantage
and get all the people who are interested in the technology
to get into it
and so that's an enormous advantage but
you know the
cherry on top or what made the whole
thing really function
well is the fact that the guy who
made it disappeared and that it
continued to operate which is just
a clear illustration that this is a network
with no admins and I'm
tempted to think that they're incapacitated
in some way probably dead or gone
because I
can't believe the
I don't believe an human being would
have this level of self control
to not get into
not want to meddle with their invention
so much
even if they
they might have had the self control to like mine
the first million coins to get the network going
and then throw away the coins or
send them to an address that they don't have the key
to
because they really just wanted the network to take off
they may have no access to the coins
and that's why they can't move them I could see that
happening but I find it hard to believe
that they would resist the temptation
to mess with the network
you know it's funny I find that the founders
of ideas are often
principled and have the integrity
that the
eventual users of those ideas
don't
fully have
we have the kind of cynical view
power corrupts absolute power corrupts
absolutely and we tend to in our
mind generalize that all humans are corruptible
and perhaps
that's true to some degree but I think
some people are more corruptible than others
and I find that there is
I mean I like to think
that
Satoshi Nakamoto is out there
and you know just like George Washington
chose to walk away
and it's a principle and the principle
is more powerful than
the financial award or any of those kinds
of things
it's a principle that stands for freedom
and there's a lot of people throughout history
even recent history that are willing to die
for these principles
or live a life
full of suffering
and sacrifice because
they're still living a life
of principle and choosing that day after
day after day so
I mean there's power to that money
what's the worth of money in the end
in terms of just personal
financial gain versus
knowing
how much positive impact there is
so the person that
chooses to walk away like that
I think is the same kind of person that chooses to live
live by that principle
you have people like that
I mean
Gregori Grisha Perlman
in Mathematics who turned down the Fields Medal
because he was
yeah that's a medal not $50 billion
of Bitcoin
I know I know I'm joking
well that's actually an interesting
just a brief comment
when people talk about Bitcoin
in the cryptocurrency space
it's often mixed up
financial interest
and ideas
I think there's often correlated
but that good feeling
you get when you win
or the number go up
or you just somebody
you know I found $20 on the street
the other day
and just that feeling of just like
ooh like more money
that positive feeling
that's correlated
but it is distinct from the power of the idea
to change the world
to change the world for the better
it's like Alex Gladstein in the case of Bitcoin
that decreased the amount of suffering
in the world because of authoritarian regimes
and just because
your number goes up
like that gambling feeling of like yes
yes this is good
and I mean short term
number go up
there's a long term number go up
that's more like investment and so on
and there's a short term number go up
that's just a good feeling
that you can't you have to in your mind
from the power of the idea to transform the world
and if you focus on the power of the idea
maybe
a billion or billions of dollars
don't matter as much
at least that's what I would like to believe
perhaps but what matters ultimately
is that the thing works without him
the things worked for 11 years without him
and I think this is the really important thing
if they had stuck around
for whatever reason
and they had continued to meddle with it
it's not clear to me how decentralized
it could have been
this is the problem with the other currencies
it's like how do you
lose control of the Frankenstein that you've created
the only way that this Frankenstein
continues to survive is if the person in charge of it
continues to feed it
and so it continues to be yours
and that's the problem with all the other digital currencies
if you've heard about any of the other 16,000
digital currencies out there
you've only heard about it because there's a small group
of people behind it that are working on it
that are promoting it
and that's why I think
Michael Saylor's discussion with you was
a magnificent illustration of
the difference between Bitcoin and
altcoins in that they are securities
and I think he makes a very compelling
brilliant case for
why this makes them
categorically different from Bitcoin
Bitcoin you're buying property
I think he mentioned he's a huge fan of
Dogecoin but I might be misremembering
you are misremembering
maybe I'm quoting him out of context
okay
let me just ask you about some
possible criticisms of Bitcoin
so on centralization
so there's a criticism
on the mining and on the
node side
or the node is not really the criticism but
Bitcoin mining is not fully decentralized
because a small number of miners
control a majority
of the hashing power
I looked it up this 10,000, 15,000
whatever the number is of computers
that are full nodes
that are actively connected
to the network
so you could argue that's decentralized
because it's global, it's all across the world
but the miners
they're still
it's more centralized
so if you're thinking of making a case for Bitcoin being
decentralized
do you worry about the miners
being somewhat centralized
is the nodes the important thing to think
about
is what number of nodes counts
is centralized and not
the nodes are what matters
because the nodes are what determines
Bitcoin's consensus parameters
I think the best way
to think about it is that miners
simply sell a commodity
to the nodes and that commodity
is Bitcoin blocks so what a miner does
is they solve the proof of work
problem so they keep operating
their computers until they can get a solution
to the problem and then they attach
their transactions and present it to the nodes
for the nodes to ratify
and approve it
so therefore
I strongly recommend people learn
about the 2017 block size war
to understand
why miners don't control Bitcoin
I discussed this briefly in my Bitcoin standard
but there's a recent book
that discusses this in detail called
the block size war by Jonathan Bier
it's a great description of
in 2017 essentially the miners
thought that they could control Bitcoin
there was
one mining company
that produced the majority of the machines
that were on the network
and their allies had
a control of the machines
that were out there
and they controlled the majority of the hash rate
and they thought that they could change Bitcoin's supply
not supply sorry
they could change Bitcoin's block size
which is a tiny little detail
technical parameters
all that big of a deal for the economics of it
but they thought that they could
pass this change
they could force this change on the network
and the members of the network
rejected it and they weren't able to
do it so
the nodes are what is sovereign
the nodes are what determine the rules of the game
the miners
are a service provider
the miners invest capital upfront
they buy the machines
they buy the electricity
they buy the locations
they pay the rent
and they invest all that money
based on the idea that if they behave
according to what the nodes want
the nodes will reward them with Bitcoin
so the miners are in no position to dictate
terms for anyone
they've put up their capital upfront
and they will only recoup it
if they do what the nodes want
so therefore what really matters
is the decentralization of the nodes
so you want to have as many nodes as possible
and you want to have a system where
there's a large number of nodes
and this is of course the biggest problem
with
with other digital currencies
because basically Bitcoin has cornered
the market on a digital currency
the only way that you can really get
traction
is to generate a whole bunch of buzzwords
but we're doing this and we're doing that
and so other digital
currencies are optimized for
bells and whistles
and buzzwords
and that means adding a computational load
which makes the nodes bigger
harder to operate and therefore you have
a very small number of nodes in fact
very few digital currencies
are keen to publicize
how many nodes there are
and they don't have full nodes in the true sense
and it doesn't even matter how many nodes they have
because
de facto
you can spin up a million nodes
tomorrow on AWS
doesn't really matter
what matters is
de facto do the nodes dictate
the rules of consensus
and the fact that with most digital currencies
you can have hard forks very frequently
and they can change the supply all the time
means that there's a small group of people who agree
amongst themselves how to move forward
yeah so you threw in a few criticism
of all coins there but so one is the small group
that one we could talk about
it's a tricky one
we talked about that with Satoshi Nakamoto
but the other one is
a small number of nodes
to push back on that as computational power
increases you can argue that
that enables more and more
cheap computers to serve as
nodes so at least it paints
a future where
nodes are always increasing
because computational power is always increasing
and getting cheaper and cheaper and cheaper
so at least there's a hope for the future
for greater and greater decentralization
on the node front
yeah but I mean ultimately
again it doesn't really matter how many nodes
you have if you
have a you know
if the way that the currency is run is that you're gonna have
a hard fork every few months which is the case
with most other currencies bitcoins the only one
that's not have hard fork
basically the
the unique thing about bitcoin
in a technical sense is that you could get
the original software that Satoshi himself ran
in 2009
to start the network
and you could run it
today and it would sync
with the blockchain there's one bug you need to fix
one
mistake that would have only appeared
I think in around 2013 or 2014 or something like that
so that he wasn't aware of back then
so you just need to fix this one time
with a little bug and then the consensus parameters
are still the same so you're able to sync
to it this is not true for
most other digital currencies I'd say probably
all of them because they've all had many
hard forks which they think of as upgrades
and you know they market this
thing as you know well bitcoin can't
upgrade but we upgrade all the time
well yeah you know what else upgrades all the
time Facebook, Apple, Amazon
anything that centralizes is very
easy to upgrade and that's precisely why
as Michael Saylor says these things are
somebody's liability they are security
you're carrying on somebody's
technical and economic liability
they can hard fork
they can 10x the supply tomorrow
yeah
they can fall victim to the same
corrupting forces that governments
fall victim to sure and for
people who don't know yeah hard fork
is a
the reverse
incompatible change
to the underlying
function of a cryptocurrency
of course there is hard forks
of
bitcoin as well
I'm sure all of which you love
dearly anyway but that doesn't matter
the original bitcoin
for the most part is not undergone
any changes
I mean it has undergone changes but
none in the
important parameters of the network
so another criticism
is about energy
so the proof of
work consensus mechanism uses a lot of
energy
what's the response to that criticism of bitcoin
yes because it's worth it
okay
the airplane uses a lot more energy than a kayak
you know when you're going to cross the Atlantic
next time what are you going to take a kayak
that is environmentally friendly according to this
insane definition or are you going to take
an airplane that consumes a lot of energy
so the cost benefit analysis here
essentially
you have to consider both the cost and the benefit
exactly and I think
it's an astonishing
testament to just how far backward
people's scientific
and technological
thinking has devolved to the point where we
think of energy consumption as a bad thing
I think it's just and in the fiat standard
I discussed the whole hysteria around
energy and I think it's
a product of fiat inflation
because it's a way of trying
to covering up the fact that energy
fuels that are reliable
and necessary for the current world
are becoming more and more expensive
because of inflation and so governments
are always looking for excuses for why you
should not be using those things and so
they promote all kinds of stupid pseudosciences
to tell you about
why these things are bad but really
you know all technology
is well not all but
the vast majority of technological innovations
involve
economizing on human time and judgment
and replacing it with machines with reliable
machines that spend a lot of energy
so that's what a telephone
does instead of having to send somebody
across the world to tell somebody something else
or send a letter
a telephone allows you to do it
the car is like that you could walk
but a car consumes a lot more energy
but it allows you to travel much faster
and safer and more reliably
an airplane is like that
modern telecommunication
human prosperity
is an increase in the consumption of energy
and I think it is
it is an absolutely criminal
thing and I genuinely mean the word
criminal to
portray energy consumption as a bad thing
because it is truly depriving
people of the chance to live a life that makes life better
you know and this is
it's truly criminal to tell poor countries
that they should not consume
the same energy sources that are being used in rich countries
that on which
our modern infrastructure and modern life
relies
that's what life is you know if you reduce the consumption
of energy in the US
to the levels that you have in poor countries today
the US would become desperately poor
a lot of people would die cities would collapse
the quality of life would decrease significantly
a high quality of life often requires
given the current technology
a high expenditure of energy
and I should be clear you know it's not a quality of life
in the sense that many people think of this as oh yeah
well you know
taking needless
flights for vacations
no no these are the
cherries on top of the cake but the substance
of the cake and the real benefits
of energy is the fact that
children
premature babies survive
in countries that have reliable 24 hour
cheap electricity
if your child is born premature that you put in an incubator
put him in an incubator or her
they're highly likely to survive
if you don't have 24 hour electricity
that child is not going to make it
and
you see it you know the level of energy consumption
per capita is highly correlated
not just to income but also to health
outcomes to infant mortality
to all of the things that you care about
and
bitcoin is just another technology
it does consume a lot more energy than central banks
a lot of bitcoiners like to
take a cop out of this by saying
well you know central banks consume money
and ATMs consume a lot of energy
and I think if you calculate
how much central banks and banks consume
I think it's a rounding error next to
what bitcoin consumes
I think bitcoin is just maybe not a rounding error
but it's still bitcoin I think is going to consume
a lot more and that's a good thing
you know what's humbling is to look
because even just looking into this
forces me to look at the energy expenditures
for many of the things we take for granted
obviously computers and other digital
our digital lives
just
bitcoin becomes a rounding error
relative to how much energy
spent on all the computers in our world
but also like
things like home appliances, microwaves
and hair dryers and stuff
yeah
yeah I mean this is
it does being hilarious it's like
oh these things that are just part of our
modern life
they're either the same order
at least the same order of magnitude as bitcoin
and they seem like trivial
parts of life
yeah and this is the thing all of the people that complain
about bitcoin's energy consumption
I presume they use washing machines
now why should their desire
for clean and dry
clothes
to consume energy and I mean
I used to live in Lebanon
Lebanon had hyperinflation
I escaped from hyperinflation
I prevented
my life could have been ruined by hyperinflation
and the reason that it wasn't ruined is because I have bitcoin
so
I don't know am I allowed to swear
on your podcast? yes please
so fuck your washing machine
given a choice
between my washing machine and my bitcoin
I'll choose bitcoin
the technology that has already saved my life
and I think it's going to save the lives of many
many many more people
but of course I don't have to choose
between my bitcoin
and my washing machine
because
we're just constantly consuming more energy
and we're going to continue to consume more energy in this world
and that's just what progress is
and a small remark
so in principle
I don't think this is a problem but the other thing about bitcoin
where it is different from washing machines
bitcoin is truly unique in this
it's the only thing
whose energy consumption
can be produced absolutely anywhere
your washing machine needs to be in your house
where you live and you live in a city surrounded
by 10 million people
and they all have their washing machines
and they're all connected to the grid
and they generally tend to do their laundry around the same time
and so
you have to put the load of the washing machine
on the grid
at the same time
and one power plant
and all of the infrastructure needs to work at the same time
and the electricity is pretty expensive because
it's being done in a place with high demand
bitcoin
does not need to buy electricity
from places where it has high demand
because it can buy electricity from anywhere
this is what's truly mind blowing about it
you can buy
the electricity you need for mining
can be done anywhere
so you can have a
waterfall in the north of Canada
300 miles away from any population center
there's water
falling, there's energy
you can put a hydroelectric dam there
and then you can use that energy to operate the miners
and then the miners just need a satellite
internet connection
and effectively you're selling that energy
that is isolated to the grid
and because of the way the bitcoin functions
because of the difficulty adjustment
the only profitable miners
are the ones who can get cheap electricity
basically if you're mining at grid
cost, if you're mining at around
the average electricity price in the world is around
14 cents
if you're mining at 14 cents in bitcoin
you're most likely not going to make it
if you're running your miners at 14 cents
because everybody could mine at 14 cents
and so what happens
if everybody's mining at 14 cents
14 cents stops
being profitable and then only the people
mining at a lower price are profitable
so that's why bitcoin mining
is not competing with your washing machine
and this is the absurd thing
about this kind of energy scarcity
viewpoint
where oh no it's a catastrophe
bitcoin is taking all the electricity
as if the electricity is just one fixed pie
that we all have to share and fight over
and this is how I keep making fun
of these stupid headlines they put out where
bitcoin is consuming more electricity than portugal
alright well maybe we should shut down portugal then
what the hell is portugal giving us
like obviously it's not
it's not
it doesn't mean that I've gotten so much criticism
for saying Cristiano Ronaldo
is not in the top five
I apologize
I love portugal
that's another discussion we should get into
because you posted a few soccer things
I realized how passionate people are about this
listen it was a joke
he doesn't have to be potential in the top five
yeah I love portugal
and even though I'm a Liverpool fan
I still respect Cristiano Ronaldo a lot
in fact I hold a very unpopular
opinion where I think Cristiano Ronaldo
is the greatest football player ever
number one over Pele Maradona
Messi better than Messi
yes he's been doing it for 20 years at the top
nobody's ever done that he's won everything everywhere
everywhere he goes at the top at the Champions League
really strong
argument to be made for him
Messi's never done anything outside of Barcelona
that's the thing
so you appreciate performance long term
versus the genius
of the actual play on the field
I mean the genius
is Ronaldo the top scorer of all time
so the genius is in the scoring
not the actual dance
of the play the creativity
well I mean I don't know
Messi's been absolutely mediocre
since he's left Barcelona
these are strong words
he scored what two goals in PSG season this year
they're out of the Champions League
what about Muhammad Saleh
you posted
is he climbing up
I think he should win the Ballon dors this year
he probably should have won it last year as well
he's been absolutely outstanding
I mean just people are so crazy
about Messi they keep giving him accolades
he hasn't deserved I think Messi the last couple
of Ballon dors that he got
I mean he's a great player and everything
but he did not deserve it last year
we can agree to disagree
you're a Bara fan or a Messi fan
I would say
no I wouldn't say I'm a Bara fan
but Bara fan because of Messi
and I just I think it's like
there's certain things
so when I was
growing up in the Soviet Union
Russia I remember Maradona
he was the first person
I saw that
I was like oh wow this could be
this is greatness in sport not just football
in sport right and for some
reason I mean something about like
the way they were commentating
the genius of his play
the mix of ego
and again the performance but being able
to carry a team on his shoulders
that I just fell in love with
whatever he represented and then by that
Argentina and then
Messi I saw when he was like
16 17 when he was just like
in the early days and when you first
see a person and you see the genius
and you notice that and then it turns out
to be actually a great player
for some reason you're invested
you're emotionally invested
you're I don't know
so you kind of just fall in love and then
you get you pick sides
that's the thing about football part of the fun
things about football soccer
is like you pick a guy
you pick a team
and fuck everyone else and you just have fun
talking shit I mean there's part of it
it's great because
I think obviously it's a very stupid
thing to do but I think if you don't do it
in football you're gonna do it in real life
that's why it's very good
you know instead of hating people
for their religion and for their
skin color hate them because
they support Manchester United
so you're a Liverpool fan
yes yes hardcore long term
but yeah so
to go back to the original point on Portugal
energy
Bitcoin is not competing with
Portugal because Bitcoin is buying energy
from places where we can't buy it
because all the places where
we can buy energy for our washing machines
we're bidding up the price
enough to make it non viable
for Bitcoin that's why you know
you see those headlines about Bitcoin consuming
more energy than Portugal well if you look at Portugal
I mean they've got giant power plants
in Portugal they've got millions of people
and they've got enormous amounts of infrastructure
where are all these
infrastructure for Bitcoin mining
you don't see it in the cities it's
all isolated it's all out
away from the cities or it's
connected to grids that have serious overcapacity
so Bitcoin is not
out there buying the expensive energy
taking energy away from
people who can't afford it
it's out there buying its own energy because it doesn't
need to buy the expensive energy that people
really need so one other criticism
from an investment perspective
from a gambling perspective that people see
is the volatility of Bitcoin
of course has been somewhat decreasing
over time but
what's your answer to the
criticism that Bitcoin is too volatile
I want to stay away
it doesn't seem like a safe place for me to
invest
either short term or long term
there's no denying there's a volatility and there's a high
oscillation in the value in the short term so
I think the
safe way to approach that
is in terms of position sizing
if the volatility
bothers you then
you're over invested perhaps so maybe you should
maybe you should
reduce the size of your position
so that the volatility doesn't bother you
and
this is the short answer
like stack as much as
your conviction will allow you to
tolerate the volatility
but the
and of course the reason you should try and
consider tolerating the volatility
more is
the options are you hold
fiat assets which only go
down stable you know relatively
stable not a lot of volatility day to day
the value of your
dollar doesn't change 40%
overnight 20% overnight
or something like that but it does go down
reliably it's going to go down 40%
you can count on it might take a year
two years five years ten years
compared to the things that you want to buy
it's going to go down by 40%
and it's not going to
come back and it's going to go down another 40%
and then another 40% and then another 40%
so the option really is
relatively short term stability
with long term decline
or short term volatility
with long term rise
and so that's another
way in which bitcoin teaches people to have a low time
preference and think about the long term so
stack accumulate and think of it
in the long term
it's a function of the fact that bitcoin is new
bitcoin is currently less than 1% of the global
money market so there's about 100 trillion
dollars of money out there in the world
100 trillion
dollars roughly of fiat and about 10 trillion
dollars of gold and bitcoin
is less than 1 trillion dollars so
you know one rich guy decides to
get into bitcoin that's going to show up on
the bitcoin chart you look at it you know
Elon Musk decides to buy bitcoin you see
the buy you know you see the news it
happens and you see the pump
Elon Musk decides that he doesn't like
bitcoin you see the drop but
you know a few years ago it used to be that
one random millionaire
would cause that pump
and now you have to be the richest guy in the world
to do that in a few years
you're going to have to be the richest country in the world
to be able to do that to the bitcoin price
maybe many years maybe not a few years
but as bitcoin grows you know think about it
as a liquid pool of
money currently it's a small
pool next to a much larger ocean
which is the entire money market and so
one person jumps from
that to this small pool they can make a big
splash as the pool grows
essentially the salability increases
and the likelihood
of one individual purchase affecting the
price so violently increases
decreases and so
over time you know as the size
of the market increases I think
we're going to see the volatility decline more and more
ultimately what
you know if you look at gold historically gold has been
very very stable it did not
achieve its stability because the central bank
was in charge of gold supply or because there was
a gold committee that decided
how much gold gets produced
it achieved that stability
because it became the most
saleable good and so therefore became the
good that contains the most cash balances
in the world and the end of
the 19th century everybody held cash balances
in gold and
new production was a tiny little
addition to
global production to the supply
so that's what made gold the most
relatively I shouldn't say
stable because nothing is stable in economics
but relatively it holds on to its value
and it's much less volatile
than digital currency than
national currencies that's because
it has the
highest stock to flow ratio
and that's because its supply
is a tiny
fraction of the liquid market
as the liquid market grows as the size
of cash balances grows and trades in bitcoin
cancel each other out
you get
only slight changes in value so I think
as bitcoin matures
that's going to decline
so effectively I think the end
game is bitcoin is
huge
bitcoin is worth something like
I think the total addressable market for bitcoin
is not just national
currencies and gold's addressable market
but also government bonds that's the really big one
so how do banks
compare to gold so you're saying it'll surpass
gold with the 10 trillion
what's bonds
where's bonds stand
and there's also national currencies which are about
100 trillion and there's government bonds
which are around 120 billion
dollars
sorry trillion dollars trillion
trillion sorry if we're saying
billion we meant trillion
so you think
bonds can move to bitcoin
I've always held
this is the prize this is the main
dish and gold is the appetizer
bonds are the main dish because bonds
are full of gold
yeah I mean
bonds have replaced gold in people's
portfolio people remember when we were saying gold
was you'd held it
as a saving as the secure part of your portfolio
and then you take risk with the equity
currently people do that by holding
a part of their portfolio in bonds
that's the part that they treat as their
saving account and then the rest
they use for
not speculation for investment in which they take
risk yes speculation
and that's stocks and equity
and other high risk
assets
I think bitcoin is not going to replace equity
there will always be equity there will always be
companies and people who want to have equity
but it will probably replace a big chunk
of current equity markets because right now
if you want to save
it used to be that you hold bonds now if you want to save
you go into stock indexes
so I think bitcoin likely eats
a big chunk of equity markets
because currently
people are using it as saving
they could eat all the bonds
that's my most
ambitious statement
the question is the scale of
time that happens across but the most
important statement you're making is about trend
yeah and also I mean let's also remember
currently bonds
nominally don't beat inflation and in real
terms they
don't come close to beating inflation
so
currently with bonds you're taking on credit
default risk to buy a bond
and also
getting less money back in real terms
well bitcoin doesn't offer you returns
but in real terms it appreciates
much more and it has I believe
a lot less risk associated with it than
any company or government
so let's make things spicy
and ask if bitcoin
fails in the long term future
as all you just said
economics, volatility
things happen in this world but the human civilization
might end in this century
I hope it doesn't but it might
there could be catastrophic events
if bitcoin fails
it goes to zero loses its number one
spot
what would be the reason if you're
an alien visiting earth
100 years from now and just
were to analyze the situation
bitcoin is a pretty new thing
so the possible trajectories of how the world
evolves together with this new monetary
technology is
nearly infinite so if it fails
one of those trajectories surely
involves bitcoin failing
what would be the reason
I think the most likely reason that it could fail
I don't think this is likely in general
but I think it is the most likely of
all the unlikely things that could destroy
bitcoin is
governments go back on a gold standard
so they make in your view
a better decision than the current system
just not the best decision
I thought you would go much
darker
so that's okay interesting
so maybe because of Russia because of China
and so on because the current war
they might reconsider
the
power that America holds
because of the monetary
because of being the primary currency and they'll
start thinking about going
on a gold standard
yeah but it would also require the US
and the Europeans and everybody to want to join
in this system and sing kumbaya
and play nice with each other
around the gold standard
I think you know given that gold already
is about 10 times larger than bitcoin
so it has a first mover advantage
if governments were to go and peg their
currencies to gold again the price of gold
would shoot up
5, 10x
and it would rise in value a lot more
of course that doesn't necessarily kill bitcoin
no again I'm not saying it's likely to
happen I'm saying it's
I imagine less likely
less unlikely than
all the other unlikely scenarios because
even with a nuclear war
like 90%
of the planet is destroyed the 10%
continue to run bitcoin
there's a quote
okay there's a movement
a community of people referred to as
bitcoin maximalists
I've seen you referred at least in the past
as the leader
of the bitcoin maximalist
probably because of your
book you know bitcoin standard
consider the bible in general you're one of the
leaders in this space
do you regret
any of the toxicity and
derision that often
or perhaps sometimes originates
from this community
definitely not I'm not
in the position to regret other people's actions
so let's just be clear
I think the rhetoric of community
is
I reject this rhetoric because I think it's
it's a way for
kind of political manipulation
and subversion
to try and
portray people as part of a community
and hold people responsible for other people's
actions which I think is ridiculous
so if you know some guy on the internet
said something mean to somebody
and then this is very common
and it's I always try and
not get involved in these things
so some guy who identifies as a bitcoiner
says something to somebody that's very wrong
of course it happens
tens of millions of people
use bitcoin around the world
and a lot of these I'd say
parasites you know people who don't have
anything productive to do with their life
you know outrage merchants
they'll come out and say something
along the lines of you know the bitcoin
maximalists are
toxic they're holding bitcoin back and
they need and of course it's manipulative
but the point behind it is they want to get
to you to they want to get people
who are you know not that nobody
with 300 followers who said something
silly they want to get the notable
people to
basically change their message so the idea
is you know I'm supposed to
apologize because somebody with 300 followers
I've never met in my life who calls
themselves a bitcoiner said a mean word
and then I need I need to apologize
and I also need to cut down on my rhetoric
about other digital currencies
I need to do that so
I'm only responsible for my own actions
and I don't
recall regretting anything
okay but let me push back or push further
into that direction fine let's see
community aside labels suck
for sure but you have
a spicy way
about you on Twitter
even in this conversation
you know you had some
some good strong words
I've always believed
life is too short to mean words
one day I'm gonna be dead and
on my deathbed I'm not gonna
look back and say
I wish I was a little bit more
circumspect in expressing my opinions
I'm far more likely to think you know what
I wish I said what I really think
yes life is too
short to hold back your opinion
the question is what is
really your opinion because you're
you're many
people in one
so there's a person that loves
there's kindness for the human beings
there's a person that gets annoyed
there's a person that
enjoys this agreement
there's a person that enjoys collaboration
and you can emphasize all of those different things
each of those different things
weigh it differently in your online interaction
there's some aspects of
online interaction that encourages
in different communities
online interaction is one community
that encourages kind of derision
mockery and so on so you get
you can choose if you want to engage that part of yourself
or some other part of yourself
economics is another community
that enjoys
being like
very straightforward about their disagreements
pretty harsh it's fun to
watch because it feels like you arrive
at the truth much faster
because you tear each other apart
but
you know that's a choice that's a deliberate
choice and I don't want
to label an entire community
of people by its extremes
I don't think you should do that but there's cultural
characteristics you start to notice
when you go to France it's a certain way
when you go to Britain London is different
than rural Britain
and New York is different than
Iowa you start to notice things
I mean you don't want to generalize there's all kinds
of people everywhere but
there's a certain way of communication
on crypto twitter in general
but also bitcoin maximus
that I even early on received a bunch
of heat so what the hell
so listen
there's definitely a difference
when I go to the computer science community
machine learning community
it's way friendlier than the crypto
currency community
I have much more freedom to actually
be what I
enjoy being which is
asking simple dumb questions even when
I've already spent years sometimes
decades with an idea I like asking dumb
questions anyway
crypto folks punish you for this
for curiosity
for
like exploration I understand the mechanism
because so many other people come
into that community and they might
masquerade
as curious but really they're trying to
inject they're trying to sell some kind
of all coin there's some scheme
there's some scheme to make money and so
I understand maybe that's just the dynamics
of the community by nature it's not like
you respond
appropriately to the amount
of charlatans
in the community so if the
fraction of charlatans is low
maybe you can afford to be more loving and kind
and so on and when the fraction
of charlatans is high you have to be
harsher perhaps
perhaps but I think
also you know the stakes are extremely high
in this situation and I think you know if you don't
like bitcoiners if you think bitcoiners
are toxic wait till you meet fiaters
the fiat the community
has financed
world wars and genocides
and the tyrants
and the mass death and destruction
the fiat community
if you want to use that term I don't believe
you should but I mean you know fiat
has destroyed the savings of pretty much
anybody who's lived through the last
20th century pretty much anybody who's lived through
the 20th century no matter where you lived
Switzerland, US, Ethiopia, Russia
you've gone through
fiat problems you've had hyperinflation
you've had bank confiscation
there isn't a family in the world today
that hasn't had its wealth destroyed
over the last century you know
they all have a story about
inflation and the hyperinflation
and bitcoin offers us a way out of this
and
shitcoins, altcoins
are essentially fiat worlds
last
gasp attempt to try and
salvage fiat
to try and salvage the idea that some people
will continue to be able to print money
and other people will have to use that money
you know
this is twitter it's a free market
it's the internet you don't have to follow
anybody that's the thing like so
what I found really
objectionable about the people
who are so butt hurt always
about bitcoin maximus is
you don't have to click follow on people
you don't like there are 300 million twitter
accounts and
if you choose to follow the accounts
that say things that annoy you
and then complain about the fact that
they say things that annoy you
I'm sorry but you're an idiot that you don't know how to
use twitter just follow
the accounts that you like it's
you know you don't have to
be part of this you don't have to listen to those people
you can choose there are a lot of bitcoiners
that don't act like this you can just unfollow
the ones that you like and vlog
since in the past year man time flies
I've met a lot of them
and enjoy them a lot and you build that community
of people that you enjoy there are lots
that communicate in the way you enjoy
and it's become a meme at this point
that I block would love I think
because I did not
I block very prolifically and I strongly
recommend people continue to block
I think twitter is you know you're not going to
get to interact with 300 million accounts anyway
so you want to be constantly curating
the experience by getting rid of people
you don't like and
following people that you like and that's just
you know after 10 years of using twitter
you know you get you accumulate
the block list which is very big which I'm very
happy for and I'm going to pass on to my children
on your deathbed
the grandchildren will gather around
and your grandfather can finally
share the
full list so
again it's just a twitter account
if it bothers you so much ask yourself
why it bothers you that some people are so
I'm not referring to you obviously
but I mean the people that are constantly
aggravated about this I don't get
bothered by anything on twitter I just block
immediately and I get to
curate the experience that I enjoy and I
recommend people do that
it's really a lot less pathetic
than complaining about strangers saying
things you don't like which a lot of
and of course the reason for it is
you know I mean when I say
it's stupid it's not really stupid there's
an ulterior motive there and the ulterior motive
is hey I have this shit coin that I made
with five other friends of mine
and I'd like you to I'd like to
write your coattails bit coiners and I'd
like you to please help me promote this shit coin
like this is I get this practically
every week whether through email
or through twitter where hey you know
this is our shit coin
you know it's just like bitcoin but
it's better because it does this and this and that
and you know basically
how can we get you to promote this shit
coin for us and
being straightforward and forthright is
a great productivity
hack because
you just tell those people no I'm not interested
it's a stupid shit coin and I wish you quick and
swift failure before you take a lot of
people's money
and that's what I genuinely think
well but I'll just be upfront
with the fact at least for my taste
just labeling everything
as a shit coin
worries me so this is
my own preference it's not a judgment on you
it's just my own preference that
I'm afraid I'll miss good ideas
I think when you're me personally
when I'm too certain about things
when I am too tribal about
things I'll miss actually
really strong ideas outlier ideas
totally new ideas
so that that worries me one of the
downsides
of the way bitcoin
is how much is at stake
financially is that it's
less open to good actually by
design that it's not changing
like with the hard forks and so on
that there's not a kind of
curiosity but exploration of ideas
of course
in some way that
curiosity can start getting injected
when you start talking about other layers
built on top of bitcoin
you start talking about applications or different
things like lightning network
that's where the curiosity can emerge
but still that's why with
cryptocurrency in general I just tried to keep an open mind
and just the shit coin
as a term is just like a statement
that I'm going to close my mind to it
that's the way I hear it
but coming out of your mouth
because you say a lot of other IG stuff
it's just more you having fun
that's the way I hear but if I said something like that
that's a I feel like
I would feel like I'm closing my mind
I mean let me give you the counter argument to that
how much time do you spend emailing back
all of these Nigerian Prince email scams
that you know email you tell you
send me $5,000 and I'll send you $15 million
none
why are you being closed minded to all of these great ideas
no but I'm also
you know maybe one of them will actually
send you $15 million
but I don't know if I know the difference between the Nigerian Prince
and many other people
I do talk to who are colleagues and so on
that are also emailing me
and they're also offering me things
but they don't sound as ridiculously spammy
yeah but I mean the moment
that somebody tells you hey I'm going to give you $15 million
for nothing just if you send me $5,000
you know you're getting something for nothing
and essentially with all the
digital currencies it's the same pitch
hey hey you know come
use this thing that will allow you to do
things that all of the things that they
pretend that they can do they can be done with
computers without having digital currencies
you know we already have AWS that does
cloud computing that does everything that
shitcoins pretend to do
the only difference is AWS doesn't have its own
monetary system tacked on top of it
to allow Jeff Bezos to basically
print his own money
but don't you think there's some gray area
so let me let me go for the historical record
and let's see if you've changed
as a
philosopher, economist, human being
you tweeted three years ago
oh well
anyone who believes proof of stake can work
is either one completely clueless
at how and why bitcoin works at all
or two
a con artist using it as a buzzword
to promote a worthless scam like Ethereum
do you still believe
that
Ethereum is a scam
and in general proof of stake
you either clueless
if you think it's interesting
yeah no I still stand by that
I think the
would you classify Ethereum as a shitcoin
for sure it's the mother
asshole from which the shitcoins spring
the royal the king
yeah I think the key thing is
the way to think about there's another tweet
from a couple years ago which is
essentially proof of work was like the invention
of flight like we've gotten this machine
and we managed to get it to fly off the ground
and proof of stake is
hey we found a great way
to make airplanes cheaper
and faster by not making them
fly
by keeping them on the ground
like the invention
of proof of work the reason the entire
digital currency space exists
is because bitcoin operates
based on proof of work if bitcoin
was based on proof of stake it would have
died or been shot down from day one
but that's a hypothesis
and a lot of people believe that
and I think they have a lot of strong support
but basically proof of work
is grounded in physics
in the real world the proof of
stake is more about
it's politics it's the federal reserve it's exactly
what we have it's exactly what we have
it's just a group of people who get
to decide the rules and it's essentially
a system that is
you know it's a security it's a company
so it's not an innovation
in any sense it's a step backward to what
we already had which is you get a bunch of people
in charge of the money now the only
reason it survives in this
and the reason I call
these things scam and I have no problem
with calling them as scams because they
fraudulently present themselves
as being decentralized they present
themselves as just being a different way
of doing decentralization than bitcoin
when it's not it's just they're
writing bitcoins coattails
and they're writing the fact that most people don't quite
understand what bitcoin is and how it works
to portray themselves as a cheaper
better more more efficient way of doing
what bitcoin does it's not
it's a less legally
accountable way of doing what central banks do
right so
and the basic criticism is that there's a
group of people sometimes a very small group
of people that can control the parameters
of the operation of the system
so over time you can't
trust it's not
gold under the mattress it doesn't have
that kind of heart it's not property
and I really very strongly recommend
your discussion with sailor for people who want to
elaborate more on this there's a bunch of people
in charge which means that
legally they should be doing this
under securities law but
even as an anarchist if I don't want to care
about that the technical
implication of it is this is never going
to be adopted as a neutral way
of transferring value on the internet because
we need you need something
that enemies can trade with one another
you can't have something that has a small
group of people in charge because A
the small group of people themselves can be
corrupted and B
they can be coerced you know you
can put a bunch of people in a room put a gun
to their head and
you can change everything in any of these digital
currencies and that's why that's why I think
you know you'll find a lot more sympathy
among fiaters
to shitcoins
the Keynesian economist
to ethereum fanboy pipeline
is a very strong one because
it's the same thing
it's like you like the idea of
people being in charge of money and you think
you're going to be the one who's going to be in charge of money
so you see a lot of this
phenomena and you see the same people that
want gold and don't like central
banking they get into bitcoin
yeah so just to actually
push back a couple of things
so one is fiat her
it sounds like I'm trying to be
a sophisticated Brit talking about theater
but
for many reasons it's not making
me feel good about that so
you know day by day
things change you used to be one of those
so people
evolve people learn people that are supportive bitcoin
might eventually become
supporters of ethereum
or go back to supporting fiat
we don't know people evolve
for different reasons you grow up you mature
or you
become enlightened so I think
every single person sort of
as this technology is evolving
as this world is evolving
as wars break out and geopolitics
change as the monetary system
is constantly
put under stress people will evolve
so we're trying to all figure it out together
that's why like open mindedness here I think
for people like me at least
this seems essential
so I expect you to be answering
all of the spam emails you get
I will prince by prince by prince
but no I don't have a clear
understanding what is the good investment
in my time what is the good investment in my money
that doesn't seem clear
because things
things are good at promoting themselves
I'm not talking about
the different kinds of things like
ethereum altcoins and so on
I just mean life
like dating
friendships
like everybody is
advertising themselves as a great investment
right
but you don't know and you have to keep an open mind
and also I don't
be
self introspective about what
how
biases I operate under
and ways I delude myself
like hallucinations that I'm living under
breaking out of all these hallucinations
it's very hard to introspect
thinking like what are the assumptions
under which I lived my entire life
that might be actually false assumptions
that's a really difficult
thought process to take
it's a dangerous one
the Nietzsche if you gaze
long into the abyss the abyss
gaze into you
it's like Alex Jones talks about this
I mean he's living
he's got demons in his head
so he has like all these conspiracy theories
that it holds in his head
really destroy him
so it's a psychological burden to carry
so if you question authority
if you question government if you question culture
the way things have been done
it's really difficult
and the biases you operate
under it's really difficult to question them
so I think like being
constantly open minded
and self critical
not constantly but a little bit every day
is important I think
yeah but I mean you know you're talking to somebody
who grew up in Ramallah
in Palestine in the West Bank
I've changed my mind
on all kinds of different things
the fact that I was even open to the idea
of Bitcoin is
has required an enormous amount
it's a heck of a journey
so I'd much rather appreciate
direct arguments
rather than these kind of general fluffy
you know you should be
oh of course yes you should be open minded
but you know also you come up with conclusions
from email sometimes when you know that it is spam
because you have to move on with your life
there's an opportunity cost to considering
every spam email so
well to me okay so I'll just say
from my relatively
sort of shallow perspective
almost like a technical person
mostly my understanding of economics is weak
proof of stake
is not obviously
weak consensus mechanism
relative to proof of work
so that's not obvious to me
that there goes wrong and it becomes
corrupted in the way that governments
get corrupted because it still
seems decentralized
now your criticism of governance
is an interesting one but if you put
that aside it still is a
decentralized mechanism
and it's more transparent than the
mechanism that governments operate on
it isn't, this is exactly what the Federal Reserve is
the Federal Reserve is a proof of stake system
the Federal Reserve is owned by its
constituent banks and so the rules
of the Federal Reserve and the regulations are
determined by the ownership which is the banks
so it's exactly what the Federal Reserve is
but it's too backdoor
the agreements between the banks
and the Federal Reserve
it feels like a lot of those agreements are made
between individuals that
sort of behind the scenes it's not
hard to, it's opaque, yes
but the only way that a proof of stake system
will take off is if you have a military
to force people to use it
that's the thing, ultimately there's no way
that it's going to take off on a free
market and that's why
for all of the bluster about wanting to move
to a proof of stake system, Ethereum have been
saying this since 2014
it's not been 8 years
they've been talking about it
we still haven't seen the proof of stake
system operational in the wild, it's vaporware
for all practical intents
it's potential, I mean you can do it
in a centralized way
but like
can it survive, can it last
for a long time? I don't think so
and I think
it can last perhaps initially
with marketing, with centralized marketing
you can promote it but
ultimately
user demand, the people that are not
interested in speculating because
they want to get rich on this, the people that are going to use it
they're going to want to use it because they can
trust that it is
not going to be messed with
but there's also applications
but there's applications on top
like the other reason I'm
interested in things like Ethereum
is you might think it's ridiculous
I thought it was ridiculous but NFTs
so what's the
you can have NFTs probably on top of Bitcoin
but you don't because there's no marketing
on in Bitcoin because
all of these ideas get promoted on proprietary
shitcoins because
but there's the network effects of ideas
of applications so they just
take off for some reason and human civilization
is such that you get excited
about stuff and large amounts of people believe a thing
and they start to get excited and it actually
has impact, like the fact that NFTs
can have an impact on the art world
or the world in general
is wild to me
but it worked, so the question is
David Rothkall has an impact
on the art world
I'm saying these ideas have
you know, we're collective intelligent
beings and we can believe a thing
and that has power
that has led to major wars
and all those kinds of things
so it's interesting to me
that NFTs took hold
and the question is, is there distributed
dApps, is there distributed apps built on top
of different blockchains that might
somehow transform the world
you have to kind of keep an open mind to that
because right now it's like
I'm the same place with that as I am
with virtual reality
it's like alright
this seems like a really intellectually
promising set of ideas here
but there's something either technically
or socially not quite taking hold
why?
and I don't know what the right answer is
so with virtual reality what's the right answer
is it just technically
the latency is too high
or
the games are not good enough
or is it a fundamentally flawed idea
that you can live in a virtual world and enjoy it
that the physical world is just
orders of magnitude better
a two dimensional display
is just as good as a three dimensional world
I don't know, why is virtual reality not taken off
it's been since the 80s
I don't have strong opinions on it
on the prospects of the technology
personally I don't want to ever
imagine myself having
something on my eyes, I'd rather just go out into the real world
but I don't have strong opinions on virtual reality
I do have on dApps and NFTs
yeah what's your criticism
of dApps and NFTs, is this a distraction
it's a way to sell
a flawed technology
the problem with dApps is
the economics of it makes no sense
in the sense that
currently
if you wanted to run an application
whatever the application is
you want to run it on AWS
you pay a specific amount of money
you want to run it on your own laptop
you pay a specific amount of money per kilobyte
of data
if you wanted to run the same thing on a distributed ledger
distributing the data over
thousands of computers worldwide
it's infinitely more expensive
and that's why we haven't seen any of these dApps
take off
and that's why I've said this many years ago
the only working application
of blockchain technology is Bitcoin
because with Bitcoin
with a few hundred bytes of data
with a few bytes of data you could
move a billion dollars worth
of
economic value from here to China
and move it safely and reliably
so that power
I can't
see it being justified
for anything that is not as mission critical
as moving large amounts of
value which require very
little amount of information
so when you look at all of the buzzwords that Ethereum
and other altcoin
marketing people like to use
and you know
if you want to wonder really why we come to
this kind of aggression is because
I've heard all of this
I've had all of these hucksters come to me for years
I've had
people in 2016
talk to me about how
Ethereum blockchain technology
is going to revolutionize real estate
deeds in India
I remember this guy
I'm not going to mention his name
but this guy was
2016 and he sold a lot of shitcoins
and he made a lot of money off of shitcoins
based on all these silly ideas
we can have blackjack
on a distributed ledger
we can have Indian real estate on a distributed ledger
and it's just
it's concerned trolling marketing
oh there's a problem with real estate
in India, real estate deeds
blockchain fixes this
buy my shitcoin and then people buy the shitcoin
Indian real estate isn't fixed
and the guy gets rich
and they move on
but I mean I'm still waiting
for a DAP to actually emerge
you know it's
the promise that we keep hearing
is something completely world changing
world transforming
and the reality is not one app
like there's one of my good friends Jimmy Song
eventually they refused to go ahead
with the bet, he wanted to bet with one of the Ethereum people
about
about these DAPs
the Ethereum people are constantly saying those DAPs are going to grow
and they're going to have so many applications
and they're going to have so many ideas
and the reality is all the
work are centralized apps
so there is no
Uber on the blockchain
there is no
Twitter on the blockchain
there is no social media on the blockchain because
these are businesses and businesses require
centralized authority to make decisions
you can't have it be decentralized
listen you're frustrated
and I could see it over a few years
of just having dealt with
a humongous influx
of charlatans
and it's no
it's water off my back
no but a man they use this
in a community they use the word shit coin
is a little bit
you call it amusement and I think
amusement is the way
to deal with the frustration
it's a channeling of frustration
like sometimes
when you have to deal with bullshit
the best way is just to laugh at the absurdity
of it all and that's what you mean
by amusement
the fact is
there is things
like artificial intelligence
how many decades
seven decades has been
often on promising
to change everything
and
it has failed time and time again
to deliver to the promise
but that doesn't mean
there's something fundamental and really powerful
about both the small and the big things
going on within the actual
research and development
within those communities there's a lot of exciting
developments and the scale at which
those developments might actually have
a transformative impact the time scale
is unclear it seems like
we certainly over promise
we dream too big and too aggressively
in the AI community
yeah and I'm happy to give people
the benefit of the doubt when they're over promising
but not when they're making their own money
when you start making your own currency
then you don't get the benefit of the doubt
because if your idea needs you
to have a new currency that you print
when Bitcoin is out there then
I'm gonna go ahead and assume that you're doing this
for the money printing.
There's a good time to mention that I am actually launching my
new coin called LexCoin
you mean shitcoin
oh god
I'm gonna have to block you with love
okay
one thing I want to ask you about is
Fed's
this paper they released in January
20th
on the potential central bank digital
currency CBDC
what are your thoughts about that is it just another
like is there pros and cons to this
is it all interesting to you
that they're even considering this kind of thing
I used to think that it's
it's just basically
waffle it's meaningless
because as it exists
the dollar is a central bank digital currency
the vast majority of dollars are digital
and
but I think the way that over the last couple of years
I've changed my mind on this I think this is
there's some serious substance behind these ideas
and
what they mean effectively is
the disintermediation of the banking system
and giving everybody
an account at the Federal Reserve
this is kind of the really
dangerous idea
and I think this is enormously significant
effectively as somebody who's lived in
the Soviet Union what this is is the return of the
Goss Bank on a global scale
with modern technology so under the Soviet Union
there was something called the Goss Bank
or People's Bank and that was the only bank
in the country and you had an account
with the National Bank
and you know if you
said something wrong your
money got terminated from the Goss Bank
now imagine that combined
with the power of digital technology
and you can see that this
could be an enormously powerful
technology
really because if banks
are out of the picture then we
changed the fundamental
reality of fiat
as being the creation of money through lending
and then it becomes the creation of money
truly by fiat by government fiat
so we moved to a system in which
money is just basically
it's like we have
money that is pieces of paper and every time we've had
money we've had fiat money
that was just pieces of paper it collapsed very
quickly with the current
system money is credit and the
creation of credit is restricted to some
point and the creation of credit
is self correcting I discussed this in the fiat standard
if the central bank
allows banks to create too much credit that creates
a bubble and then there's a collapse in the money supply
which prevents hyperinflation
from happening because
the money creation is
self destructive it's self correcting
so you end up with an average
of like 7% per year
increase because you have
10% for 5 years and then you get
negative 20% for
1 year and it's
correct but now if you get rid of the credit
creation mechanism and it's just assigning money
directly we're likely going to get
much faster inflation and I think
that's obviously
the huge problem and perhaps the
even bigger problem is the
enormous amount of power that it gives
to governments it's
it allows them to create an awful
dystopia where
you've got your money
on your phone and
anything you do
is completely supervised and
controlled through your spending so
they want to introduce a new lockdown
then they'll just make your money not
work your money is broken today
you can't spend money or you
can only spend money in your local supermarket
for the next 3 months because
you can't leave your neighborhood your money stops working
outside of your neighborhood
this Chinese social credit
core system is an example of this
and I think
I don't know I don't have a crystal ball
so I don't know what the likelihood is
of implementing something like this in the US
I've discussed it with
Michael Saylor he thinks it's
highly unlikely he thinks you know
the people who've been pushing this
are very far from the position of power
and the traditional
monetary and financial system is going to
survive intact
I certainly hope so
I think this would be a terrible thing if it comes to pass
but I don't think many people think that it
is something that would undermine Bitcoin
like a lot of common objection to Bitcoin
is well
governments are just going to launch their own digital currencies
and then Bitcoin is going to die
and I think this is completely missing the point
people think Bitcoin is important because it's digital
it's not
national currencies can be digital
Bitcoin is important because it's not inflationary
and because nobody controls it
central bank digital currencies are likely to be
very inflationary
and they're likely to have very strong control at the top
so if anything they are an
advertisement for Bitcoin rather than a
replacement for it
if it's Bitcoin if it's gold it's a way for multiple nations
to partake
so if you were to imagine a future
where we move
from the fiat standard
back to the gold standard
and then to the Bitcoin standard
or skipping that going directly to the Bitcoin standard
what would it take
as a gradual as immediate
what are possible
trajectories that take us
well basically where the final sort of empirical
observation is that you overtake
Bitcoin overtakes
first gold and then bonds
in terms of
its monetary
power in the world
but like just specifically from
a government perspective how do we move the United States
China, Russia, India
European Union
to a Bitcoin standard
I'm not entirely concerned
about whether governments move or not
in fact I'd be very happy
for them not to move
as long as possible
so that individuals can accumulate
more and more Bitcoin while it's still cheap
so the people will move
and the governments
will catch up
yeah and I think this is kind of what I
allude to I mean the point of the fiat standard
the fiat standard is really a Bitcoin
going book and it talks about fiat
most of the time but it's
does so to analyze Bitcoin
and the rise of Bitcoin in the final chapter I discuss
how I think this relationship
plays out
the way that I tend to think of it
is that most likely what's going to happen is
we're gonna have kind of
financial apartheid where there's going to be
two monetary systems
one is government controlled
and it comes with increasing
amounts of surveillance and inflation
and then if you want
you can just opt out of that
and get into Bitcoin
and it's likely going to be difficult
for governments to stop people from getting into Bitcoin
for all of the technical reasons
that make it very hard to stop Bitcoin
so then we have this alternative
that is Bitcoin which is not inflationary
and does not have
a central authority that can censor it
I think
gradually
is my hope and I also think
my most likely scenario
but maybe I am biased because
everybody thinks what they want
is what's going to happen
I think we're just going to witness the same
relationship because
governments make their currency so that they can
devalue them
and Bitcoin thrives on that
and more and more people are going to learn
more and more people are going to find out
and whether it's through
curiosity or self interest
or personal currency
all roads lead to Bitcoin
so more and more people are going to buy Bitcoin
the price of Bitcoin is going to go up
and as it goes up Bitcoin becomes
a more significant part of the world economy
and this is something that skeptics
don't get like a lot of the academic skeptics
to Bitcoin
they offer up all of these theories
about why they think Bitcoin
can't work and then they present it
and they think they've
delivered the knockout blow
or the word is going to need their permission
well the reality is people are going to join Bitcoin out of greed
out of self interest
number go up technology
is really what's going to get everybody in
and that's really the Trojan horse
for fixing the world
come for the greed
and stay for the revolution
it's going to keep going up because
people don't like to be poor
except for most economists and academics
people don't enjoy getting their wealth destroyed
and they care more about their
self interest than they care about
economic theories about whether this works
as money or not they see their cousin
escaped hyperinflation
managed to get a bigger house because they bought Bitcoin
five years ago they realized maybe I should stop
mocking my cousin
and start buying more Bitcoin and this is
I think an indomitable force
that's going to continue
and one thing
most Bitcoiners
tend to lean toward an apocalyptic
transition
fiat is going to collapse we're going to get hyperinflation
everything is going to be terrible and then we're going to move to Bitcoin
and
I present the case for why I think
maybe that might not be the case
maybe we won't get this kind of apocalyptic
scenario
and this was like the conclusion of
the fiat standard which is
once you realize that mining fiat is creating
debt
and Bitcoin is allowing
so in order to have fiat money we need to have people
borrow we need to have people make loans
and
the problem that fiat money runs into today
is that if you want to save money
if you want to hold savings
you have a problem
where do you put your savings
so you put your savings in debt in the creation
of more bonds
wherever you take your savings you create a bubble
in those things and this is why we see a bubble
in the stock market a bubble in the bond market
a bubble in housing it's because
people are looking for savings
for a place where they can save all of those things
are crappy saving instruments because
they're like
they're like copper in that there's nothing
to stop the people behind them to make more of them
house
builders can build more houses
governments can issue more bonds
crappy fraudulent companies
can list on the stock market and make more stocks
well Bitcoin finally
offers us an outlet we don't need to keep
creating more debt we can
invest in this asset that is
hard and that is internationally
liquid and
that nobody can make more of so
there is no bubble in it there is no mechanism
for somebody to
increase the supply and bring the price crashing down
like with copper in real estate and bonds
so
Bitcoin is the way out and this is why I think
there's a good case to be made for why the fiat
authorities
might embrace Bitcoin because they'll see
it is their way out of this
enormous debt bubble that everybody
is stuck in particularly
the richest and most powerful people in the world
and the richest and most powerful
governments in the world are the world's biggest borrowers
they're the ones in a lot of debt
so a continuous
slow devaluation of the value
of that debt as people
upgrade and move on to a hard asset that
continues to appreciate
is the way that we
is the peaceful way that we wind down
the fiat Ponzi I think you could see
it being like a political part
of a political platform for future
people that run for president those
kinds of things to address
obviously
it's not just for the powerful and the rich
the people are bothered by the debt
the people are bothered
by everything that you describe with fiat
and if you want to
sell yourself in a democracy
as a good leader you might want
to make that part of the platform
you mentioned you know Michael Malis
he just texted me asking
me to ask you
what do you like best
about Michael Malis if you can
spend 5 to 10
to 20 to an hour talking about
the genius of Michael Malis
what do you like
where does one even start
obviously the haircut first
yeah he just gets sexier with age
that's for sure
his ideas
his trolling
and humor
and then she has to interact with him
yes yes I've met Michael maybe
10, 12 years ago in New York
I used to live in New York when he used to live in New York
met him a couple of times
there was a bunch of
anarchists in New York used to throw a happy hour
once a month
it was called the high time preference
Hoppe hour
in honor of Hans Hermann Hoppe
so I met him there a couple of times
and we followed each other
on Twitter for a while
is there interesting that you're aware of
philosophical differences in your world views
um no I think
we pretty much see eye to eye
um
I think the difference is mainly that he's
he spends a lot of time focusing on American politics
and American pop culture
which I don't pay much attention to I guess
so you look more
at the monetary system, the economics of it all
and just the history and just looking at it
zooming out
at the big picture of it all
although recently he's working on a book called
the white pill
and he's been
every time I see him
I mean he's in some dark aspect
of the 20th century
he's just like I just finished writing about Hallenomore
as you might imagine
he's not taking much
I believe of a monetary perspective on things
his book
his writing at least for time
his kind of philosophical
ideology perspective
on the outside of the monetary system
but you argue that those are actually
inextricably linked
but yeah and I don't think he would disagree
but he would uh
but a book has to be
you know it can only be so long I suppose
it can only focus on
so many things
if you can put on your wise sage hat
and give some advice
to young people
I mean you know the past four hours have been
a kind of advice but if you can
focus and if somebody in high school
or college is thinking about
what to do with their career
can have a successful career
or to have a life they can be proud of
what would you tell them?
I'd say probably the most important advice that I would give
is to find a way to give
value to other people
this is really the key thing
you need to wake up every morning
and figure out how to serve others
this is the key to
everything you want in life
is on the other side of you
serving others so figure out
how you can serve others in a good way
how you can do it in a way that they value
and you've got an incredible
mechanism for figuring that out
which is the market
go out there and do things for other people
and you know the market will tell you
the market will tell you exactly
if you're young you have the enormous
advantage of being able to make
mistakes essentially and learn from them
so
go out there do things of value for others
figuring out how
you can do something
what is it that you can do
that contributes the most value to other people's lives
and increasingly
I think with modern technology
this is increasingly becoming online
and it's
I think you should consider how you can
create value online
because that scales
beyond anything that you can do
in the physical world
well maybe not beyond obviously
there are profitable businesses
in the physical world
but I think online is enormous
potential and coding
I think is enormously powerful
I'm not a coder myself but I strongly recommend
people get into learning how to code
and I think
it's probably the thing that carries the most
power
so initially we were working with our hands
we started working with machines
machines are much more productive
and even higher level of productivity
where you basically
program the machines to produce things
so
few clicks of a keyboard
and you can move millions of machines
around the world in certain ways
so it carries an enormous amount of value
I think
I always tell all young people to learn to code
it's the best thing
I used to tell it to my students when I was at university
tell them to drop out and go learn to code
it's probably a better use of their time and money
we could probably do both
university has an interesting function
I mean probably
you and I have different perspective on this
probably has to do with a little bit of a different journey
in terms of
fields because I'm so
I've stayed engineering focused for a long time
and there's less some of the troubles you might
highlight in the education system
there's less troubles of that kind
in engineering
because math hasn't changed for a long time
so
a lot of it is just doing hard things
being forced to do hard things
and becoming a bit of a generalist
while on the side you're also
becoming a specialist
based on your own passion
driven by your own passion so
school at least high school I don't know about the
university but high school
has a really nice
one of the only times in your life
at least in my life
I was forced
but now I see
given the opportunity to spend
my entire day learning
broadly and that's something
I don't know the way time works
it just runs away from you and you never really get a chance to do
learn quite that broadly
again
that's the curse of specialization
is you kind of never get a chance
to study biology, chemistry
if you're a physicist
time runs away from you
so enjoy the broad
the broad education
but like you said
find the things that
valued by the market
and on the other side of it
you said all the good stuff so
that's also a way to get happiness
and I also add the horse
that I like to whip all the time is
the low time preference aspect of things
saving with bitcoin
so I think my advice to young people is
when you're young you think
of the world in a very short term
generally you're focused
on the present and you think that everything that's happening
in the present is the most important thing
that's ever going to happen in the history of humanity
lower your time preference
think about the future, think further down the line
think about the consequences of things
you do and then what
so you do this now, it feels good today
but then what happens tomorrow
you go out, you drink, you enjoy yourself
think about the hangover
but in long term
think about the implication of living this kind of life
think about
every decision that you make
the long term implication of it
and part of that is bitcoin
part of that is save in bitcoin
I urge everybody to put savings
in bitcoin for the long term
don't buy bitcoin for the short term
don't buy bitcoin today so that you can sell it
don't put your savings in bitcoin today
so that you can sell it all next month
and buy a house
put money in bitcoin that you expect to
keep in bitcoin for another
5, 10 years
at least 4 years is what I recommend
for people so keep a low time
preference, focus on the future and save in bitcoin
and
learn about how to buy bitcoin
how to learn about all this technology
part of this is this conversation but there's so much awesome material out there
and thank you by the way
for this gift of a hardware wallet
nice
so you should definitely invest in it yourself
and
what would you call this, these are
open dimes
so this is like USB
like a hardware device that stores bitcoin
so you don't have to worry about
knowing the
password, it contains the password within it
and it's tamper proof so you can save the bitcoin on it
so when the apocalypse comes
you need
the value to be stored
an actual thing that you can have in your physical possession
that's exactly what this is
you've had a heck of a life
you've been
in a bunch of places in this world
a lot of places
life is not easy in some of those places
what has been
if you can take a step to
to maybe
a bit of a dark step for a short time
what has been a
maybe darkest time
period place you've ever got in your mind
a dark period of your life
a struggle
they had to overcome, they had to survive
well, I'm Palestinian
so that is the
tragedy of my life, I'm Palestinian
Jordanian
my family's
suffered a lot because of this
historically, I grew up
in Ramallah in the West Bank
wasn't
ideal to see that
people like to think of it as this
intractable conflict between two bitter enemies
but
the reality of the matter is that it's not
a foreign ideology came in
with the idea that this country needs to be
occupied by people from
only one religion
and the existing population
Jews had always lived in Palestine
historically
and at the turn of the 20th century
they were only 10% of the population
but then with the birth of fiat money
incidentally, the link
with all of this is that
when the Bank of England went off gold
a big reason why they were able
to pull that off was that the Rothschild
banking family supported them
in exchange the Rothschilds got Palestine
and
the Balfour Declaration
was written by the government
of Britain to the Rothschild family
telling them that
they
liked to make
Palestine a homeland for Jews
so obviously that's not very
convenient for people who are not Jewish
for whom that is a homeland
and the past 80 years has been
a very painful struggle
if you happen to not be Jewish
and obviously
Palestinians have done all kinds of things
trying to fight back and they've done
all kinds of wrong things
but I don't think you can escape the fundamental
reality underlying this which is that
if you're not Jewish
you are being moved out of the land
and so it's happened in 1947
it happened in 1976
more land was taken over by Israel
and the settlements
if you ignore the day to day headlines
and you ignore the media propaganda
and you ignore all of this
there's a very clear thing that is happening
which is more land
owned by an exclusive
ideology that believes this land
needs to be owned by people from one religion
and everybody else is being
kicked out and so
that is the tragedy of my life
and my wife is also a Palestinian refugee
in Lebanon and her family
was evicted from
Yaffa which is today
on the outskirts of Tel Aviv
they still have their homes
in Yaffa their homes are being
kicked out of their homes and their lands
and their property they became refugees in Lebanon
so my children
it's an ongoing tragedy
it's not something that is
a lot of the people that
think of it as
they think Palestinians are just out there to get
Israelis because they hate them
but it's an inescapable tragedy
I don't have a home anywhere
is there an escape from this tragedy
in the future that you see
if you zoom out across the
scale of decades
will we see
I hesitate to say peace
but
a significant decrease
in human suffering in this part of the region
I certainly hope so
and I think
my interest in Bitcoin comes from
came from a place of desperation
with the situation there
traditional politics is
a dead end
I don't see what I
can be doing to make things better there
using traditional politics
and I think a good friend of mine
Pierre Rochard you may know him on Twitter
one of the brightest minds in Bitcoin
in my opinion he told me
his theory is that Bitcoin is going to bring
peace to the Middle East because land
is a shit coin
and land is a shit coin
I love it and I think he's got a very good
point there that this fixation
with land and the bitterness
with which people have to
with land is likely
to decline when people are going to have
a form of property that they can
keep and so
hopefully that will help in one way
and of course the more obvious way
that this is a conflict of
governments and it's a conflict that is
financed by fiat and from day one
you know the entirely
insane notion that you could
build a national
an ethnic homeland
and of course you know this is the early
20th century so
the idea behind Zionism
is coming from the same place where
all these other ethnic nationalisms
of Europe were emerging and we saw how
well how
horribly these worked out but the idea that
you could you know
it's one thing to say we want to build a homeland
for Germans in Germany
for Germans somewhere else
and that was
that was
Palestine that was Zionism and that was
only possible thanks to fiat thanks to the
ability of the British government and
all these other governments to continue to
finance this colonialist effort over time
and
you know it continues to finance war
and it continues you know we see
war all over the world continue to
escalate because
the people who make the decision to
escalate the war are not the ones who are paying
for it and they're not the ones who are fighting
they're the ones who sit in offices and in
the case of you know most of Middle
Eastern conflict it's
it's people who live abroad you know it's
people who are abroad are not part of it who just
are emotionally charged to it because
they watch it on TV so
you know you have billions of Muslims
around the world and
Jews around the world who feel
extremely emotionally attached to it
they're not the ones fighting they're not the ones paying
their own money they're just getting
governments to send money and to send
weapons and to take part
and it's
it's fun
as a spectator sport for most of these
people because they don't get to live in it
but I got to live in it I saw it I grew
up there I saw
the settlement expansion and you know
recently a few weeks ago I went back to
Ramallah and it's just
it's amazing every time you go
the the settlements are just growing in
an astonishing way like it's
it's not just
housing units that are going up it's
an entire attempt to build
to basically
suffocate Palestinian areas
and force Palestinians to leave or
keep them living in horrific
conditions
and if I may
just because I have family in Ukraine
I have family in Russia
since this war
echoes of similar things are happening
in that part of the world too
and I
shudder to think about the decades
to come
of the hate that is brewing
the suffering that is brewing
based on decisions and
pressures and
from not always
people directly
impacted by this so again
it feels like that
military conflict is not
just a creation of
like people on the ground
it's a creation of leaders power centers
and
and perhaps
again I'm not smart enough but even the
monetary system probably has a role to play
I absolutely think it does
monetary system is what allows
is what allows people to just continue
to treat war as a spectator sport
that's really what it comes down to
and starts with World War I
and it's continued and this is why
really I think
I've said this before
I've tweeted this before and it was a pretty popular tweet
but it also got a lot of people
to dismiss
the idea with mockery of course
but I really think Bitcoin is the only
technology that's going to end World War I
once World War I
started we got into this endless
conflict it's been going on going since then
if you look at all the world's conflicts today
pretty much they all trace back to World War I
and it's because
when that Pandora's
box of government control of money was
opened there was no longer
a real restraint on war except
complete defeat and complete destruction
and complete death the war had to be total
before that you know
under the gold standard
Kings would
send professional armies to fight
each other in battlefields
and as soon as it became clear
that one side was establishing
an advantage the fighting would stop
and the king
would settle
you know would agree to new terms
because it was extremely expensive
to build a professional army
and you ran out of money so it was always
the smartest thing to do is to just stop
fighting whenever you could
and wars would take place you know
countries would fight each other in the battlefield
but in the cities life went on as normal
and people within the same cities
within the cities of the two countries
would be trading with one another
life would go on but the war would be there
and it was just
an independent
part of politics that
alright we have a problem over this piece of land
let's do it and you know let's take it outside
we don't fight in the civilian
areas we go to the battlefield
we fight with professional armies and in fact
sometimes the conflicts would be
you know the armies would line up
and they would just have a small
contingent of the two armies
fight with one another and as soon as one of them
establishes an advantage then
alright well you won
let's move on with it
governments were far far far more
careful about
their monetary policy
and their sorry their war
policy when they couldn't print their money
and that has changed with fiat
and that has allowed this
new emergence of this class of what I like to call
chicken hawks
of people who sit in office like the entire
foreign policy establishment
in washington dc
people who have never fought a war
whose children will never fight a war
who will never pay to fight a war
who will never suffer a broken
window in their house because of war
sitting there and based on
these fucking moronic
garbage that they teach at
moronic fiat universities about politics
and geopolitics making decisions
about you know we need to invade that country
and we need to send war there and
they can do that because they have this endless money printer
where and that's why
you know back under gold
if you wear a warrior you know
you went and actually joined the war
and that you know
the people who pontificated about war
where the people who had experience with war
the people who were sending their own children to war
the people who were fighting with their own money
now you have all these
fat parasitics come sitting in washington
and dc deciding and washington
is just an example but all over the world this exists
people who have never fought
will never carry the consequences
we're going to devalue the world's money
in order to go and
have other people's children
fight each other because of
stupid garbage they learned about
politics in university
you said
you value low time preference
but I have news for you
that one day you will die
as far as we know
you're a mortal being
do you think about your death
do you think about your mortality
are you afraid of it
I
spent a lot of time
introspecting and thinking about these things
and I value life a lot
I value my time on earth a lot
and you'll see this
in my dealings with people
you know go back to twitter
why am I so brash and straight forward
it really is because life is short
because I don't want to waste
I think you know on my
I've
said this before
on my tombstone let it be written
he never let anyone waste his time
twice in his life
his life is short
yeah you can waste my time once
you can get me to do something and then I realize
that was a waste of time you will never get me to waste my time
twice and so you show up
in my twitter with something stupid
showing up in my twitter
you give people a chance but you're a fast learner
yeah so I try and
use my time very wisely and I
I'm unapologetic about it
my time is the most precious thing and like
the way to get on my shit side
on my shit list forever is to try
and take away my time
and to abuse my time if you do that
I'm
it's the one
unforgivable sin for me
and I think that's really I think
my way of coming to terms with mortality
we're all gonna die and so let's make the most out of it
while we're still here and of course the other way
you come to terms with mortality is you have children
given what you just said
um
doubly so it's a huge honor that you
will spend your valuable time with me
this is the first time you did it so you probably
regret all of it so
we'll probably never see each other again
but I'm glad you at least took the chance
to do it it's a huge honor
I've been a huge fan of yours
I think you have impact
on the world that you probably are not even
aware of it's tremendous
and a lot of people love you
and your work is important even
you know I disagree with some things
you say there's people that disagree with you
but everybody respects you
and thank you so much for spending your really valuable time
with me today brother thank you sir
really appreciate it this was not a waste of time
and I'd be happy to do it again
thanks for listening to this conversation
to support this podcast please check out
our sponsors in the description
and now let me leave you with some words
from the Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek
economic control is not merely
control of a sector of human life
which can be separated from the rest
it is the control of the
means for all our ends
thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time